question - answer
What is the essence of wine, in terms of flaws? - The essence that is not an essence. Universally unloved, the flaws in wine are as insidious as they are unwanted, and come in many forms. The sharp vinegar and acetone tang of volatile acidity; the rotten eggs reduction; the overly nutty or balsamic note of oxidation; the sweaty socks, garlic and stinky cheese of mercaptans; the wet dog or manure of brettanomyces yeast; and yes, the all-too-common wet cardboard or wet band-aid aroma of cork taint. All too be avoided rather than celebrated. But knowing the difference between a faulty bottle and a wine that you just don’t like remains harder than you might think. Levels of sensitivity to these compounds vary among individuals, and to make matters worse, in tiny amounts they don’t always ruin a wine. A modicum of volatile acidity and brettanomyces are even coveted by some winemakers (and their customers) as a distinct element of either their terroir or their intended style. One drinker’s rustic wine is another’s sewer of bacteria, or so it seems. Learning to recognize these flaws is a useful skill for anyone who enjoys wine, but this proves not so easy to do outside of a classroom. Serious students of wine should spend at least one afternoon subjecting themselves to sometimes-gag-inducing levels of these delightful monsters at some point in their careers. Know thine enemy, or so the saying goes.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of oak? - Few have actually spent time gnawing on a piece of oak, but some know the scent well enough, having perused the selections at their local lumber yard. Some may have even tried their hand at drilling, cutting or planing in the service of one or another project. Many more know the flavor of oak, even if they never identify it as such, thanks to the popularity of whisky, rye, and bourbon, all of which usually taste of planks cut from American forests. The oak we find in wine, on the other hand, more often hails from France (though wine barrels are manufactured from forests all over Europe). The interaction between wine and the wooden vessels used to make and age it is one of the few things in the world that approaches alchemy. Oak smooths, sweetens, spices, and polishes wines in ways that range from imperceptible to completely ostentatious. In some wines, oak announces its presence with more texture than flavor, while in others it screams like a cross-cut saw in mid-bite. Opinions differ on whether the flavor of oak is best when strong or subtle, but none can deny that wine as we know it could never have come to be without wood.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of passionfruit? - The fruit takes its name from the vine on which it grows. But no matter how sensual the fruit or however beautiful its blossoms, the missionaries who named the vine had something else in mind entirely. The complicated flower’s anatomy conveniently facilitated mneumonics for the Passion of Christ — 10 petals for faithful apostles (sorry Peter and Judas), three stigmas for three nails on the cross, five anthers for five wounds before death, and a halo of radial filaments to visualize the crown of thorns. The precious fruits of the vine, in purple and yellow, seem to have avoided a deeper symbolism however, and are left merely bearing the same forename. Passionfruit offers a mouthwatering zing thanks to an extremely high dose of Vitamin C, as do kiwifruit and gooseberry, two other fruits whose similar tropical kicks often find their way into wine. Interestingly, Pinot Noir and some other light reds will occasionally evince a hint of passionfruit, which can be quite delicious. But passionfruit and its ilk find their true home most often in Sauvignon Blanc, which can all but burst with these sunny flavors and their accompanying acidity. No matter the wine, the snap and crackle of passionfruit’s electric flavors quicken the pulse as well as the palate.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of violets? - Before it was the perfume of our sorrows (garlanding poor Ophelia’s demise, no less), it was the flower of kings. Ion was the name the greeks gave both the flower and the king of Athens, who wore them as a crown. The violet’s scent and symbolism weaves through our entire recorded history — as evidence of love’s truth, as medicine, as rare confection, and as the beguiling aromatic calling card of queens and courtesans. Perfumers and botanists agree, its scent is most unique among the flower kingdom, and those who have been lucky enough to snatch a whiff of violets from a glass of red wine have a hard time forgetting the experience. The grape Nebbiolo, especially from its home in Barolo, seems to most often host the alluring scent of violets. Cabernet Franc, too, can quite often mix a bit of the purple flower in amongst its nutty, cherry bouquet, leading to appearances in Bordeaux and its many red cousins around the world. No matter where or when it appears, the sweet scent of violet will always beguile.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of green wood? - A childhood spent out-of-doors yields memories of many scents, including the vivid astringency that marked forested adventures, especially with a pocket knife in hand. A well-whittled stick. The peeled curve of willow strung with makeshift bowstring. The gnawed end of a green twig. The sharp green scent of freshly stripped bark hangs between woody and herbal, even approaching fruity in its most juicy form, and can often feature in wine, especially from cooler climes or chilly vintages. When grapes struggle to ripen, or when they are deliberately picked on the doorstep of ripeness, they retain essences not obscured by sun-driven sweetness. Hints of green wood add a tangy complexity to red wine, and occasionally to white. Both Pinot Noir, Cabernet Sauvignon, and Syrah commonly possess a hint of peeled bark mixed with their primary fruit, especially when the grapes have been fermented with their stems. A controversial flaw to some, mere complexity to others, greeness or goodness is always a matter of degree.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of graphite? - Perhaps if you were well-behaved or maybe just lucky, your teacher sent you to the edge of the classroom with a tightly-clasped fist of yellow, where you would have the pleasure of producing those wavy ribbon-like curls of beige and gray that litter many a school day memory. There may come a time when, like the clack of a typewriter or the stutter of a rotary phone, children do not recognize the smell of a freshly sharpened Number 2 Ticonderoga or FaberCastell. But for now, the scent of shaved or pulverized graphite brings instant recognition. Part woody, part metallic, the aroma of pencil lead has a bookish, even literary quality, especially now that many of us leave them behind when we finish our schooling. In the wine world, the scent of graphite might as well be the scent of money, as it most often emanates from the alchemy of expensive wood and wine. Cabernet kissed with finely toasted French oak most often proves the source of such aromas, but many reds given enough quality time with their wood will show it off as well. Like many such signatures of winemaking, graphite easily strays into the zone of too much of a good thing, but with restraint, it adds equal parts complexity and nostalgia to your glass.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of the sea? - With your eyes closed, even absent the screams of wheeling gulls, and the throaty slap of waves against the sand, you’d know where you are. The tangy scent of the sea is unmistakable. The flavor is equally familiar thanks to the crunch of seaweed, the tiny tidepools of oyster liquor that some of us slurp, or even the saline shock that accompanies an open-mouthed tumble in the waves. Isak Dinesen said “the cure for anything is salt water: sweat, tears, or the sea” reminding us of the affinities between our bodies of water. If we find the sea in us, then how hard is it to find it in wine? The Romans, never short on subtlety, were known for adding seawater to their finest vintages. Today we taste and smell the sea in tinier, more piquant doses — a whiff from a glass, or a trace on the tongue. The French, in their elegance, have repurposed the word iodé to capture the iodine tang of the ocean in wine, while others find crushed shells and kelp in everything from Champagne to Sherry. Like many of wine’s more savory notes, a hint of the sea goes a long way towards another gulp, or even another glass.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of grapefruit? - Pendulous globes of yellow dangling like suns from their leafy boughs must have been tempting indeed to those Barbadians who first named this “the forbidden fruit” of their isle. How far the simple grapefruit, and its parent the pomelo, have come from tropical exotic to breakfast tables everywhere, in their shades of yellow, pink and beryl red. Somehow more sensuous than many other citrus, the pearly texture of grapefruit flesh and its starchy, foamy pith mark it just as much as its flavors, which can vary greatly. Yellow yields a soft sweetness with a woody and bitter kick, while pink and reds dial up the sour with the sweet to sometimes an electric level. This dazzle of acid and flavor find their most common analog in white wines, whose flavors sometimes perfectly evoke a bite of bright pink sunshine. Rieslings are common culprits in a mouthful of grapefruit, but many other wines can evoke its many flavors — zest, pith, or juice. But no matter how, finding a bit of grapefruit in your glass is never be a bad thing.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of licorice? - Many of the world’s true delicacies walk the razor’s edge between danger and deliciousness. Licorice is not fugu, of course, but too much of this innocuous little confection can lead to everything from hypertension to liver failure. On the other hand, apart from being tasty, this extract from a woody-looking root has been used as medicine for centuries, and continues to be today. Most, of course, encounter not the physic but the candy: a drop, a vine, or a chew — some salty, some sweet — but all offering that unique pungency which speaks in the tones of earth, but sings with notes of green herbs. From the delicate scents of dried fennel seeds, to the intensity of star anise, to the sweet earthiness of chewy black licorice, red wines find many ways to express this flavor. No single grape possesses a monopoly on the scent of licorice, rather many varieties planted in many grounds can all offer a taste and sometimes even a texture. For many it is a taste of childhood. For others it may be a flavor to avoid. But as a chord in the song of some wines, it offers a complex harmony to any major melody.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of melon? - The melon is hard to ignore. Its fullness, dangling awkwardly at the end of a slender vine seems to make a conspicuous show of fecundity and the promise of interior treasures. And what treasures they are. The perfectly ripe melon — its pale green, yellow, or orange flesh dripping with nectar — instantly recommends itself as a food fit for royalty or the gods themselves. In Japan, though imported from its Arabic and African homeland relatively recently, melons have become oddly both an expensive corporate gift, and symbolic of the final taste of this world at death’s door — the flavor worthy of shepherding any soul to its next destination. While perhaps not reaching such a flavorful apogee, the aromas of melons can make appearances in wines in all their many hues from Cantaloupe to Casaba to Honeydew. Muscat in its many guises most often hints at, or even blurts such flavors outright, but many other white grapes (including Friulano, Garganega, and even Riesling) can also provide the same sweet floral satisfaction. Like so many echoes of food that we find in wine, the scent of melon cannot approach the real fruit’s intensity, but in this case, even a trace does the trick.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of strawberry? - Bright gems nestled under tiny green canopies represent the perfect summer treasure for fingers small and large. A perfectly ripe plucked strawberry offers the quintessence of flavor. And what a flavor! Sweet. Juicy. Tangy. Fresh. While perhaps not equal to the pleasure of summer foraging, finding notes of strawberry in wine yields delight in good measure, especially when it comes to pink wine of all kinds. Rosé remains the perfect embodiment of strawberry essence — crisp, juicy, refreshing, and hard to resist. But even some red wines carry this fresh brightness. Grenache in particular is known for often evoking strawberry, but grapes as familiar as Pinot Noir and as exotic as Schiava or Kalecik Karasi can also summon the same fruit. More than anything, the aroma of ripe strawberry serves as the perfect reminder that wine should provide at least as much frivolity as it does fascination.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of lychee? - For what other fruit would Chinese emperors establish networks of galloping couriers to deliver it freshly plucked and in the height of its ripe delicacy? If you grew up in Asia, lychees would be a well known treat, thanks to a 2000-year-old love affair with these curious pink nodules that dangle enticingly from their evergreen boughs. But for western palates, they can be an exotic, even unnerving experience, thanks to the peeled fruit’s resemblance to a freshly extracted eyeball—both in appearance and imagined texture. Should such hesitations be overcome, however, the slightly resistant and slippery flesh yields wonderfully unique floral flavors tinged with a subtle, woody sweetness. And this special flavor finds echoes in many white wines, especially Riesling and Gewurztraminer, whose own fruit can be exotic and bright and just as fresh as a precious handful riding like the wind to please a royal palate.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of bread? - Science suggests that the smell of freshly baked bread calms us and stimulates the brain the same ways as music and art. But did we really need science to know this? Bread has always meant comfort, home, and basic sustenance for human beings, and few culinary pleasures rival the aromas, taste, and texture of a loaf right out of the oven (growing ranks of celiac notwithstanding). Oxygen, time, oak, and grape variety all contribute to the fact that some wines smell and taste of breadstuffs. Champagne in particular, especially with age, acquires notes of saltine crackers, toasted sourdough, fresh biscuits, or the perfect yeastiness of a crusty french loaf. Such flavors and aromas aren’t restricted to Champagne, though its extended dalliance with yeasts in the bottle makes it one of the most prominent examples. Several white grapes can deliver the pleasure of a morning’s bakery stop, or if mistreated, the unpleasant brewers yeast stink of autolysis gone wrong. But when a wine gets it right, it can be glorious as well as positively gulpable.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of pears? - Which is a better testament to its glory? That the oldest languages we know all have a word for “pear?” Or that its growing patterns spread like alluvial fans along the world’s most ancient trade routes? We’ve apparently been charmed by this awkwardly bulbous fruit since prehistoric times, when its dangling, fulsome ripeness must have been a welcome gift in the wilderness. Time and the experimental flights of our own fancy have produced thousands of varieties, with hues from purple to white, and with characters that are equally diverse. But from the translucent-skinned, velvety Bartlett, to the crisp and floral Asian pear, a thread of flavor unites its many incarnations. The pear’s unique combination of slightly woody skin and sweet juicy flesh make for complex organoleptics that are frequently evoked in wine. Pears are a signature flavor across many of the world’s whites, but especially Pinot Gris, Riesling, Friulano, Malvasia, Grüner Veltliner, Pinot Blanc, Furmint, and Chenin Blanc. Though pears, like apples have long been made into their own elixirs, they never appear quite so sublime as they do wafting out of a glass of white wine.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of umami? - The fifth taste. The molecular expression of savory deliciousness that explains what bacon, chicken soup, and sautéed mushrooms all have in common. Unlike many of the things we taste, which are more aromas than tastes, the flavor known as umami is perceived directly by the taste buds. Perhaps for this reason it can be just as much a sensation—a sudden rush of mouthwatering goodness—as an actual flavor. Originally discovered by a Japanese researcher looking to explain one of the distinct qualities of his country’s cuisine, umami exists everywhere. Sometimes the product of cooking, sometimes the product of nature alone, we are drawn to this flavor in all its incarnations. In wine, umami can assume any of its many foodish guises, but quite often shows up as notes of olive, miso paste, soy, and more. Red wines, more often than white, seem to employ this flavor, especially as they age. But umami can show up in nearly any glass, usually with welcome results.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of apples? - In one simple fruit are all man’s sins remembered. Dully reflected in the freckled orb we have witnessed some of our deepest archetypes. Forbidden knowledge, betrayal, murder, immortality, respect, sustenance, even civilization itself. Doubtless the first tree to be cultivated by humankind, the apple is woven indelibly into the history of our species, as symbol, as food, and as medicine. Mythological history aside, we have been remaking the fruit for thousands of years, to the point that it truly represents the diversity of our whims and tastes as a people. More than 7500 different varieties of apples can be found around the world, a kaleidescope of color and flavor not unlike the remarkable variation of wine grapes. From green to red, tart to sweet, the flavors of apple find their way into many wines. In fact, apples and wine share the sharp tang of malic acid, which lends each the sour greenness that puckers and pleases at the same time. Aromas of apple are not restricted only to white wines, where they can be found in abundance and in many mouthwatering hues. They also appear, much to our delight, in lighter red wines such as Pinot Noir, or many other red wines of significant enough age for their fruit to take on the distinctive flavor of red delicious skin. How about them apples?
What is the essence of wine, in terms of blackberries? - Fingers splotchy dark purple, scratched and pricked. Snags and scrapes and dirty knees. The occasional razor burn of nettles and the mad lingering itch of poison oak. These are the hazards of the blackberry patch, where the choicest bundles of shiny, dark goodness hang just out of convenient reach. So we must lean, shuffle, stretch, and occasionally tumble through briar and thorn to capture the prize. Summer blackberry picking stains the memory as easily as it does the fingers. It is easy to recall the scent of dust and dried wheat, the herbal green of trampled canes, and the flavors that were the fruits of our labors: the shuddering tart sourness of a berry picked far too soon, the minty note of a stray bit of leaf, and the deep, dark, electric sweet of the season’s most perfect berry. Blackberries and their ilk — olallieberries, boysenberries, loganberries, marionberries, and black mulberries — find their way into wine’s flavors thanks to Syrah, Zinfandel, and other intense dark grapes. From the thick, jammy flavors of a freshly baked pie, to the briary, tart flavors that echo those half-ripe fruits of over-eager foraging, blackberries characterize a rich segment of the wine world’s flavors. Some decry the wine that too exuberantly sings of dark fruit and little else. But the best give us the same sweet and barely sour burst of lip-puckering goodness that has us still stretching to the end of our reach for just...one...more.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of plums? - The tree has become so beloved that its name has become synonymous with beauty. From the grace of its slender boughs, to the spectacular burst of its blossoms in Spring, the plum has inspired some of history’s greatest poets, painters, and thinkers. All that, before the delicate flowers give way to their precious fruit. Plums may well be the first tree fruit cultivated by our species, and remains one of the most cherished, playing a prominent role in many Asian cuisines, especially Japanese. With a range of flavor from frightfully tart to tangy sweet, the plum’s combination of sour skin and sweet flesh echoes the same properties in wine grapes. No wonder then that these piquant flavors surface in many wines, mostly red. Merlot, in particular, boasts a plummy quality that can be quite charming, but this bright purple sweetness ranges much wider through the grapes of the world. The juicy, ripe flavors of damsons or blacks aren’t the only faces of plum in wine, which can sport the intensity of prunes or the mouth-puckering sourness of umeboshi and everything wonderful in between. There’s a reason that we use the name of this fruit to describe something desirable or particularly appealing. We may not remember the poems of Lin Bu, but we know a good thing when we taste it.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of dried herbs? - The mystery of the medicine man’s pouch. The secret to grandmother’s stew. The smell of the apothecary. Sundried leaves, perfectly cured, have long been treasures to be carefully guarded. Dried herbs heal, soothe, salve, and protect. They preserve, prevent, perfume, and flavor. They stimulate, and they even kill. In varieties to many to number, they have found their way into almost every facet of our lives, and we are much the better for it. Sage, marjoram, assam, rosemary, lavender, thyme. Anise, chamomile, oregano, cannabis, parsley, hyssop. Sometimes singular, sometimes swirled into a bouquet of uncertain origin. Finding dried herbs in wine can be like stumbling over a set of your childhood journals, so evocative these flavors and aromas are of time gone by. No surprise then, that the savory notes of delicate, crackling leaves and flowers often emerge from wines that have gathered dust for some time on the shelf. Five, ten, or twenty years can produce a cornucopia of changes in a wine’s flavors. But these delightful aromas are not limited to aging bottles. They can emerge from the freshest of vintages and a wide range of varieties, depending on everything from where and when the grapes were picked, to how they were aged. Often the perfect counterpoint to fruit, a hint of dried herbs in a wine, much like in any fine recipe, can make the difference between the ordinary and the delightful.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of roses? - Few things in this world are laden in equal weights of symbolism and perfume. For millennia we have asked an ancient flower to stand in for factions, for status, for sex, for God, for beauty, for secrets, for ideology, and of course, for love. 2500 years of devoted cultivation have produced countless hues and shapes and scents of rose. We paint them, we wear them, we give them, we eat them, we decorate with them, and we anoint ourselves with their remarkable perfume. So distinct and special is the flower’s perfume, that finding it in a wine glass can be as shocking as it is pleasurable. Yet the scent of roses emerges unmistakably from several notable grapes — the pink-tinged Gewürztraminer, the dark ruby Nebbiolo, and several shades of Muscat, among others. The smell of dried rose petals mixed with the dark tar and leather notes of an aged Barolo remains one of the wine world’s most profound and sought-after experiences, while the flowery breezes that waft out of a well-made Alsace Gewürztraminer conjure up hyper-color landscapes of crisp sunlight and crystalline blue skies. The pretense of speaking about wine’s perfume can seem stilted at times, but not when the wine smells of the world’s most beloved flower.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of dried fruits? - Describing the flavor as ancient barely does justice to history. Dried fruits were perhaps the very first prepared food that human beings thought to make or consume. The earliest examples of writing we possess and understand, the barest hint of scratches on clay tablets, all contain sundried morsels. Imagine the delight of the earliest senses at the chewy sweet rush of flavor delivered by a date, a prune, or a fig, its essence concentrated by sunlight. Until global trade unleashed sugar on the world, treats such as these were the most precious of commodities, for little in the world besides honey itself offered such sweetness. Wines from white to red offer the full panoply of dried fruits to the palate, from berries to cherries to exotic tropicals. Indeed, some wines are themselves made from dried fruit, whether thanks to the helpful natural action of the Noble Rot botrytis, or the carefully orchestrated combination of air, sunlight, and human ingenuity that goes by many names — passito, de paille, pasas, slámové, forzatura, strohwein, and more. But wine need not be sweet itself to display these flavors. A later harvest, the effects of age, certain grape varieties, and even just a lot of oxygen during winemaking can capture notes of dried fruit in the bottle. Too much, and a table wine can taste tired or overly candied, but when balanced against other elements, the taste of dried fruits in the glass can summon that first, eye-widening primal bite.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of blueberries? - With the feel of suede-like skin on the tongue, a tiny globe yields to pressure from the teeth with an explosion of juice — first sweet, then slightly sour, pure and bright. Occasionally a hint of fresh green herbs in the fruit reminds anyone who has stooped among diminutive bushes of the delightful search for summer’s bright blue sparks. Few organoleptic delights compare to the burst of a perfectly ripe blueberry in the mouth, with its unique combination of floral sweetness and acidity. Native to North America, but now found elsewhere in the Northern Hemisphere, blueberries and their brethren — huckleberries, bilberries, serviceberries, and the like — make an appearance as flavors primarily in red wines, and often in those made from Zinfandel, Malbec, and Syrah. Even Pinot Noir grown in some climes can take on a blue fruit character. While some wines smell remarkably blue, only a few wines taste distinctly of the fruit. Instead the flavor can often be found hiding in layers of taste, swirled amongst other fruits in a decidedly delicious blue concoction.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of peaches? - Few flavors so fully speak of summer as the delightfully juicy sweetness of peaches. Long prized for their sensuous skin and delicate flavors, and revered for the vitality shown by blossoms that emerge before the tree has leaves, the fruit was the natural food of Chinese deities for millennia, each bite guaranteeing the gods their continued immortality. Carried back along the Silk Road, peaches later flourished in Persia, where enterprising princes likely first bred the fuzz right off their backs. Peaches, nectarines and apricots, with flavors ranging from delicate rose petal to tangy, almost citrus sweetness, can be evoked by some of the world’s most compelling wines. Classically associated with grapes like Viognier and Gewürztraminer, peach and especially apricot flavors can appear in many white wines, especially those that are the product of the fungal magic known as botrytis cinerea. Creeping into vineyards under the cover of fog, botrytis concentrates sugars and often seems to open doors to rooms filled with the yellow-fleshed fruits of summer. Some wines, though, seem to need no encouragement to burst forth with their peachy flavors, as anyone who has ever encountered a Condrieu can attest. No matter how some wines end up tasting of peaches, there’s little denying that they offer a measure of the same pleasure on the palate, which for many is simply pure gold.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of nuts? - Saying that our relationship with nuts goes back for some time dramatically understates the case. For three quarters of a million years, we’ve been eating tender morsels pried from armored exteriors that we’ve crushed with everything from stones to precision machinery. Raw and roasted, warm and toasted, nuts offer flavors earthy, woody, and even meaty. In wine, these flavors add grace notes to fruit, their savory qualities lending complexity and depth. Lean and savory white wines such as Riesling or Chenin Blanc can suggest cashews and brazil nuts. Richer whites often feature roasted hazelnuts, pecans, and pistachios. Champagne can offer everything from salted, toasted nuts to the smooth essence of marzipan. Reds, especially Cabernet Franc, can reveal delicate flavors of almond and hazelnut skin or the burly bitterness of walnuts. Many wines, both red and white, develop nutty characteristics after a decade or two, as fruit and oak and oxygen dance their mysterious evolution. Whether they come from the alchemy of oak, the richness of time, or the grapes themselves, the aromas and flavors of nuts can evoke the soils, vines, and leaves of the vineyard in ways that notes of fruit sometimes may not. And of course, sometimes these salty, toasty flavors simply just demand another mouthful.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of garrigue? - Through crystalline blue skies, the sun all but drips onto your welcoming skin. With eyes closed, you are nudged by a soft breeze, whose caress brings with it a perfume unlike any other. Redolent with sage, thyme, rosemary, lavender, and juniper, the landscape reaches for you with invisible fingers, stimulating, salivating, and ultimately seducing. This is Provence, its scrubby hills laden with weeds that have made possible some of the world’s most enduring flavors and aromas. The French have not only given us this precious landscape, they have also given us the word that describes this incredible melange of scents: garrigue. Perhaps unsurprisingly, garrigue features prominently in many wines of southern France, its burst of heady herbs often leaping from a glass of Gigondas or Bandol. But Provence has no monopoly on the aroma, which appears most often in red wines, and sometimes most prominently after a few years in the cellar. Intertwined with aromas of fruit and earth, the savory notes of garrigue can lift a wine from the realm of delicious to the plane of irresistible.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of lemon? - Bright as sunshine, electric in its sour purity, lemon is one of life’s most essential flavors. Its true origins in southeast Asia may never be known, but after a long career as primarily an ornamental and occasionally medicinal fruit, lemons found their first real fans during the Italian Renaissance. By the time Columbus began his voyage, lemon seeds were prized enough to be included as cargo, and bestowed as gifts upon the new world. Few cuisines of the world fail now to incorporate lemon, and fewer parents have forgotten the face that accompanies an infant’s first taste. More than any other fruit, lemon makes an appearance in white wines — dry, sweet, and sparkling. From zest to pith to juice to candied rind, from salty eggy lemon curd to sweeter tangy Meyer flesh, lemon often lives where wine’s acidity crackles. Pucker up and drink it down, or just bask in the beautiful yellow flavor.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of mint? - From the wailing currents of the river Cocytus, a river nymph named Minthe glimpsed the passing chariot of Hades, and was seduced by its dark rider. But the instant their passion flamed, a jealous Persephone intervened, transforming the innocent naiad into the aromatic herb we know by the same name. Even before its creation myth, mint was both a medicine and a delicacy. Its aroma in wine often blends with eucalyptus and cut grass, their collective green seeming evidence of transubstantiation and somehow more remarkable than flavors of exotic fruit. Truthfully, a vineyard shadowed by eucalyptus or carpeted in mint often carries those flavors through to a finished wine thanks to airborne oils. But sometimes the green mysteriously emerges from the grape itself, a product of when it was picked to where it was aged. These bracing herbal flavors that cool the tongue and lift the spirit may just as well have been forged from the sweet breath of a nymph carried on an ancient breeze.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of espresso? - Its discovery in the highlands of Ethiopia remains shrouded in the mystery of lost tribal lore. Having bargained for beans, the Sufis were the first we know of to begin the brewing ritual whose mere scent can enliven the soul. Once a sacred Muslim stimulant, its formulation closely guarded, now the world can hardly imagine life without the rich indulgence of coffee and its firm grip on our circadian rhythms. Bitter, nutty, earthy and woody — approaching caramel and chocolate but never quite reach the extremes of confection — coffee’s layered and dramatic aromas are unique and unmistakable. The scents of a freshly pulled espresso sometimes emerge from a bottle thanks to the toasted oak of top-quality barrels and the magical synthesis between wood and wine. Entertwined with earthiness and rich fruit, an espresso note in a glass of red adds a richness that echoes the pleasure of that primal, steaming cup. And occasionally in sweeter wines, a note of coffee touched with honey can truly dazzle.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of watermelon? - Its flavors hold memories of long days, green grass, laughter, and innocence. Of all summer fruits, none holds more spirit of childish delight than watermelon. The crisp red, or more exotic yellow, tantalize with promises of thirst-quenching, lip-smacking sweetness beneath the green rind. In the world of wine, the flavors of watermelon are most often found in the luscious brightness of rosés. In the brief flirtation of skin and juice that produces these delightful wines, we receive aromas most magical, where a sip can echo the gratification of sinking your teeth into a half-moon of colorful, chin-dripping goodness.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of white flowers? - One of life’s great, mysterious pleasures can be encountered on a temperate summer evening in certain places in the world, when from out of the darkness, comes the incredible scent of flowers on the night breeze. The universe of fragrant white flowers contains an amazing array of enchanting scents — tuberose, jasmine, acacia, gardenia, orange blossom, and lilly of the valley are just a few sources of these aromas, whose dynamic range spans angelic delicacy and raw, powerful sexuality. Such scents make regular appearances most often in white wines — both sweet and dry — but also, occasionally reds. Their presence, even as the barest trace, can transport us into vast landscapes of fantasy and memory. Close your eyes and take a sip of paradise.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of buttered popcorn? - Unmistakably redolent of American childhood, nothing quite compares to the scent of freshly popped corn drenched in movie theater butter. Adored or reviled, and sometimes both at once, for its rich, guilty pleasure, buttered popcorn seems to trip the most primal triggers for indulgence and comfort. The creamy, salty, toasty scent entices no less richly in the aromas of wine than it does in a cinema lobby. This unique aroma most often results from the complex chemistry between the toasted oak of a barrel and the remarkable bacteria that convert tart, green-apple malic acid into the smooth, buttercream of lactic acid. Proportionally layered on top of leaner flavors and aromas, notes of buttered popcorn add an almost irresistible savoriness, most often to Chardonnay, where the tension between salinity, acidity, and fruit in just the right proportion can yield results nothing short of transcendent.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of tobacco? - Broad leaves, kiln fired, transmute a weed into an aromatic wonder that has conquered the world. Before it became a scourge, it was sacred to some of the world’s earliest peoples. Like many such medicines, tobacco began its life as a gift from the gods, to whom it would return with messages from the living when smoked. From dark pitch to burnt caramel to sweet fruit, and always laced with wood, the smell of cured tobacco makes its way into many wines, most often thanks to wood itself. The toasted oak of a barrel can lend Cabernet, in particular, a deep note of pipe tobacco, shown best as a grace note rather than a blast of flavor. At its best, tobacco’s richness marries with the darker qualities of fruit to add spice and mystery, if not a bit of nostalgia, to a glass of red. Better to drink it than to smoke it.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of oranges? - A fruit, a color. By its name, we shall know it well. From the ancient Dravidian and Sanskrit we receive the root naari, which means fragrant, and begets the name nagarugam, for the sweet fruit whose origins are lost in time. The Persians borrowed these narangs and carried them to Spain, where the Moors left their naranja groves, and to Italy where a bit of arangia went a long way in Latin, and became the precious arancia in Italian. Along the way the fruit slipped sideways to ancient France, where Gallic tongues preferred orenge, something we English speakers could almost pronounce at first taste. A symbol of wealth and prosperity, oranges stand in for gold on Chinese altars, a reminder of ancient Mandarins that didn’t grow on trees. From satsuma to clementine, valencia to navel, the orange, like the rose, reflects the changing passions of its keeper. Tart, bitter, floral, sour, meaty, juicy and even candy sweet, the flavors and aromas of orange are often a surprise in wine, both red and white. Wherever it surfaces, orange will always be fragrant.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of lime? - Once it was a closely guarded military secret. Anti-scurvy powers lent an indelible nickname to the British, whose superstitious Limeys probably snatched the idea from Tantra, which prescribed the fruit to ward off evil spirits. Perfected in the heart of Persia, limes in great variety have become essential to everything from cooking to cocktails. Tart and grassy, floral and sour — whether in the perfume of fine curry or the rowdy flavors of Margaritaville, lime blinks neon green all the way down. Wines with lime flavors generally abound in refreshing crispness, whether they burst with citric juiciness, or vibrate with the tart and sour dryness of freshly-grated zest. It may prove an ultimately delusional confusion of grammar that so many white wines tasting of lime come from vines whose roots sink deep into limestone, but experience suggests an affinity that is more than coincidental.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of exotic citrus? - There was a time before lemon and lime, when from the far reaches of the East there came fruits of such shapes, colors, and scents that the gods themselves asked for a taste. Ganesh, in his wisdom, chose the citron, sanctifying its sour flesh for rites most holy. The Buddha favored what the Japanese call the bushukan , though it was said the Enlightened One preferred the fruit with its fingers closed, as in prayer. For sukkot Jews require an etrog fruit whose very dimensions determine if it is kosher. All these delicacies persists today with their other ancient brethren, preserved by five thousand years of devotion. Yuzu, bergamot, kumquat, buddha’s hand, rangpur, sudachi. Their flavors surface mysteriously in wine from time to time, sometimes faint, sometimes frank, but always unmistakably exotic.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of bell pepper? - Christopher Columbus was an unwitting pawn, the tool of a plant with grand designs. The seeds of nightshade he carried back to Spain would quickly go on to conquer the world, enslaving cultures for the remainder of history in their culinary devotion to what the ancient Meso-Americans called xilli. As spice, as medicine, as food, there is but a single constant: flavor. But too much of any one flavor in a wine can mean clunkiness instead of complexity. Many of wine’s essences are best as grace notes instead of dominant melodies. Such is the case with capsicum. Its key flavors reside in molecules called pyrazines, to which we are so sensitive, that just a few molecules are enough to make anything taste or smell exactly like a freshly cut green bell pepper. These vegetal flavors (never mind that capsicum is a fruit) persist in most unripe grapes, but linger especially long in the Cabernet family, to which they add delicacy or distaste, depending on your point of view. Whether for you an imperfection or a mark of honesty, the flavor is unmistakable.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of red berries? - In the depths of the forest, shafts of sunlight pierce through dark green canopies, illuminating bright red jewels glinting amidst green briars. Treasures of flavor, the berries of forest and heath have long been gathered by eager hands seeking the kind of delights that only come from morsels such as these. Raspberries, red currants, pomegranate, cranberries, thimbleberries, and goji berries. Tiny mouthwatering bursts of tart sweetness that pucker the cheeks, these red berries play the starring role in many wines. The best wines not only evoke their flavors and aromas, but also the juicy, tangy, explosion of biting into the real thing. Bring on the berries.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of tropical fruits? - The languid allure of the tropics finds some of its most sensuous expression in the fruits of its forests. Equatorial flavors have a sunny perfection about them, an impossibly pleasurable ripeness, that can evoke anyone’s idea of paradise. Pineapple, papaya, jackfruit, and guava. Banana, mango, passionfruit, and cherimoya. You don’t have to go far to find such flavors in wine, which are no less pleasurable and evocative in the glass than they are on a plate, or better yet, dripping down your chin on a sunny day. Sometimes paradise is only a sip away.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of cured meats? - For omnivores, the scent is unmistakable and for many, just as irresistible. From the smoky scents of cooking bacon and charred meat to the salty, tangy notes of saucisson, few things make the mouth water more. Finding such savory notes in wine can be alarming to the unprepared, and many never get used to the cognitive dissonance of fermented grape juice that smells like fried porchetta. For others, however, these aromas often possessed by older red wines are treasures to be sought and hoarded, or as the case may be, plundered. Certainly when married to cool, stony fruit or welded to ethereal, woody spices and berries, meaty flavors can offer quite a feast for the senses.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of chocolate? - Montezuma’s gift was given first to the heavens, and only then to the rest of mankind, the latin theobroma cacao, literally meaning “fruit of the gods.” When Cortez returned to Spain bearing the exotic dark fruit of the Aztecs, the world was never the same again. Synonymous with pleasure, from an infant’s first taste to the connoisseur’s careful snap, few foods in existence rival the raw passion of chocolate. Its complex chemistry reveals itself not only on the tongue, but in the hidden pathways of our minds, which react to it not just as a food, but as a drug. Chocolate’s appearance in wine — nutty dark flavors and aromas rising up through fruit — can take the breath away. Cocoa powder, bitter dark, or milky sweet. Each flavor offers a small miracle of alchemy and a mouthful of delight.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of pepper? - Lives were lost. Empires were built. The new world was discovered. All for the sharp spark of taste with the power to transform mere food to cuisine. It’s hard to imagine the shock and astonishment that must have accompanied some human’s first bite into a dried peppercorn. The incredibly disproportionate rush of flavor contained in these crinkled, colorful motes easily arrests us, even when we know it is coming. Pepper’s explosive character finds a dual analogue in wine, which both stirs us with an equally surprising kaleidoscope of flavors, and also occasionally includes notes of the pungent spice itself. The scent of pepper in wine, from faint to full frontal, can be an alluring, mysterious, exuberant or joyful, and occasionally, even overpowering.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of cherry? - Biting into a perfectly ripe cherry represents one of life’s perfections of flavor and sensation. The firm skin parts under a modicum of pressure, and a gorgeous melody unfolds on the tongue — high notes of juicy acidity, rich baritones of velvety sweet red fruit, an earthy alto bitterness of skin, and a tangy tenor quality burst in the mouth in a way that makes it all too easy to overindulge. Cherry’s singular flavors, from the dark black to the bright bing and the sweet yellow rainier, are a familiar refrain in many wines, made from myriad red grape varieties. While cherry’s unmistakable essences emerge from many a glass, it is hard to deny that good red wines often evoke the fruit even in metaphor, their songs as lip-smackingly rich and sexy as that perfect orb of red, just plucked from the tree.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of wet stones? - Perhaps you have lingered in a mountain stream, climbed alpine ridge-tops or descended crevasses. Perhaps you have tasted rain on your tongue, or drunk deeply from a stone cistern, echoing with time. Even if you simply revel in petrichor, the smell of pavement just after a cloudburst, or remember washing chalkboards in school, you understand the smell and the taste of wet stone. Some say deep questing roots that probe and fracture rock can transmute the minerals themselves into wine. Science has no easy answers for the relationship between bedrock and berry, but what may elude chemistry is not lost in wine. Pundits argue the meaning of minerality, but what escapes definition may still be tasted. A sip that speaks of deep granitic coolness, or the bright calcified bones of ancient fossils tells a better story than letters and numbers.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of vanilla? - Sprung from the legendary blood of forbidden lovers suffering the wrath of a father king, slender jungle orchids climb skyward, their fruit bearing heavenly scents. The Aztecs demanded tlilxochitl, this black gold, in tribute after conquering the tribes who first unlocked vanilla’s secrets. As intense as it is ethereal, vanilla possesses a singular, breathtaking purity of aroma. Barrels imbue wine with much of the vanilla we taste. Their singed oak can offer up an echo of flowers in ancient forests, or deeper notes of caramel and butterscotch. Sometimes floating above the wine’s fruit, sometimes wrapped around it, and sometimes welded awkwardly to a woody frame, vanilla’s elemental allure is hard to ignore and easy to love.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of honey? - Sunshine, gathered from flowers by tiny apian efforts, forged into ambrosia that tasted of immortality to the Greeks and Egyptians. The alchemy of honey seems no less marvelous even to those that have braved the swarm to witness its creation. Like honey, wine serves to transmute the world’s most basic elements into a form seductive and irresistible. When wines taste of honey they seem to taste of sunlight itself, a brightness that coats the mouth with a satin warmth and gently tugs at the heart like a summer breeze. The scents of honey wafting from a glass urge us on to abandon.
What is the essence of wine, in terms of earth? - Earth. The first of the elements that the ancients held as the basis for all life. The source of all our sustenance. Wine has always been inextricably linked to the dirt, the root of terroir. That wine can sometimes taste or smell of earth should come as no surprise. Like walking through the spongy loam of a dark wet forest, scents of soil and mushroom, dust and mud often resonate with a dark bass note underneath other flavors and aromas. Flavors of earth are often borne on the textures of tannin, as if the very liquid had been strained through deep roots. Wines that express something of the dirt from which they spring are revered for this transmutation of place into taste, and justifiably so. The smell of the wet ground touches the deepest memories of our species, reminding us from whence we came, and to where we will return.