word - description
Barolo - The small region of Barolo makes one of Piedmont's most famous wines. Barolo wine can fetch high prices and is highly sought after, particularly from the top producers. The region is further divided into further subdivisions (Barolo, Castiglione Falletto, La Morra, Serralunga d'Alba, etc.). As a big generalization, the wines, made from 100% Nebbiolo, tend to be more "masculine" and full bodied than those from nearby Barbaresco (see below), the other most famous Piedmont region. They are long-lived wines that improve with age. Traditional styles can require 10 or more years before being ready to drink. However, in recent years, some producers have favored a more modern style with more new oak aging to make softer, flashier wines. While the traditional wines (from producers like Conterno, Giacosa and others) can take more patients, we find them to be ultimately the better, more passionate wines. These wines can be incredibly complex with heady aromatics and textures can be breathtaking. Unfortunately, most good Barolo is expensive, starting at around $40 in the US and going up quickly for the most famous producers and vineyards.
Barbaresco - Barbaresco is a close neighbor to Barolo and shares the limelight as the two most famous Piedmont wines. Barbaresco wine, which is also 100% Nebbiolo, has many similarities to Barolo, with similarities in the aromas and flavors of rose petal, red fruits, tar, earth, meat and mushrooms. However, the character of Barbaresco can be quite different. It is generally less tannic and could be said to be the more "feminine" of the two with a great elegance. Some are more approachable younger but the best examples still require some years to reach maturity. Like Barolo, they are not inexpensive.
Barbera - Unlike Barolo and Barbaresco, which are Piedmont wines named for the place they came from, Barbera is the name of a grape. This grape is widely planted in the north of Italy and possibly reaches its greatest expression in Piedmont. Particularly the Barbera d'Alba and Barbera d'Asti are famous versions which can be sublime. The wines tend to be fruitier, riper and less tannic than Nebbiolo but still with a meaty complexity to the flavors. Young they taste more generous and fleshy. They are excellent food wines. Made from similar vineyards, there are many similarities to Barolo although these tend to lack some of the depth and longevity of the best Barolo. For this reason they tend to be much less expensive and are an excellent option as a "poor man's Barolo". For example, Bruno Giacosa, one of the best producers in Piedmont and the world, produces a single-vineyard Barbera from the Falletto vineyards which typically runs around $30-40. However, his Barolo, from the same vineyard, can fetch several hundreds of dollars.
Dolcetto - Dolcetto is the name of a grape. It is also widely planted in Piedmont and makes wines that are even more fruity and lighter than Barbera. They can be great, simple and refreshing food wines and tend to be quite inexpensive. If I had to compare it to something better known, they can be similar to Beaujolais from France, with similar juicy, ripe fruit but with an Italian touch. They are best drunk young and make good everyday drinking wines.
Moscato d'Asti - Moscato is a white grape, the same grape as Muscat in France, which is vinified in many ways in different regions. However, it has an affinity for making sweet or slightly sweet wines. The Moscato d'Asti, made near Asti in Piedmont, is a famous example and is both slightly sweet and has a slight sparkle to it as well. Most are frizzante with just a slight sparkle while a few are spumante with bubbles approaching the level of Champagne and other sparkling wines. These are all relatively inexpensive. While poor examples can be cloying, simplistic and boring, the best have a great energy and fresh fruitiness which is fun and refreshing.
Arneis - Arneis is another white grape grown in Piedmont. The wines are dry and vibrant with minerality and rich fruit flavors.
Chianti - For better or for worse, Chianti is the most famous wine name of Tuscany. It is one of the oldest regions and has been producing wine for centuries. It is a large region in the middle of Tuscany and the principle grape variety used is Sangiovese. This varietal produces wines with an earthy complexity to the bright red and black fruits. It has the acidic bite to give it freshness and lift while being capable of producing a wine of great depth. Currently, wines must have at least 75% Sangiovese, although some have more, up to 100%. There can be 10% Canaiolo and up to 20% of any of the other grapes approved for use in the region, including Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Syrah. Chianti can be labeled as simply Chianti but can also be labeled according to one of several sub-appellations in the area, most notably Chianti Classico and Chianti Rufina. The wines of Chianti can vary quite a bit. While some of the less expensive examples are simple with a tart bright fruitiness, some can be quite dense and rich and age-worthy. The Reserva wines are aged the longest and are usually from the richest, ripest fruit, giving the most complex and structured wines.
Brunello di Montalcino - This Tuscany wine is produced from a small region around the city of Montalcino near the Chianti region. The wine is produced from 100% Sangiovese. However, here it is a local clone of Sangiovese called Sangiovese Grosso, also known locally as Brunello (roughly translated as the "nice dark one"). This clone of Sangiovese produces a darker, more muscular wine than the normal Sangiovese. Therefore the wines tend to be darker and richer than those of nearby Chianti. They are aged a long time, at least 50 months after the harvest, partially in oak barrels and partially in bottle. The Riserva bottling are aged a year longer. These wines can have a leathery, fleshy texture with lower acid than Chianti and darker flavors. They tend to be quite structured and can take many years to reach their peak. Younger wines are also bottled as Rosso di Montalcino and are a good, less expensive option if from a good producer.
Vino di Tavola - Many years ago, adventurous Tuscan wine makers started experimenting with various grape varieties in various locations throughout Tuscany. Because these wines did not conform to the local rules for wines from any one specific appellation they could not call them Chianti or Brunello or any other place name, they were simply called Vino di Tavola, or "table wine". However, wine lovers around the world started to take notice of some of the best of these wines and coined the term "Super Tuscans" to distinguish them. Some of the famous first wines were Solaia and Tignanello from Antinori, Sassicaia and Ornellaia. This lead to an explosion of new planting and wine making in the region and hundreds of new wines, often with creative names made up by the producer rather than relating to a specific growing region. It is very difficult to make generalizations about these wines because they are made from many different types of grapes, from different sub-regions and in different styles. Common grapes used include Sangiovese, Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot. While some producers make more traditionally Italian styled wines there are many that make wine in a more "international" or "modern" style, using lots of new oak for aging and producing ripe, rich, powerful wines along the lines of modern California or Bordeaux Cabernets and Merlots.
Vino Nobile di Montepulciano - This Tuscan wine, made around the town of Montepulciano, is sometimes confusing to people. There is an Italian grape variety called Montepulciano which is unrelated to this town. Some wine made from Montepulciano, the grape, is even made in parts of Tuscany. It is most famous for its part in Montepulciano d'Abruzzo, not in Tuscany. However, Montepulciano is not a part of Vino Nobile di Montepulciano. Instead, these wines are made from a minimum of 70% of Sangiovese (the local name being Prugnolo gentile), blended with other grapes. The wines are aged at least 2 years in barrel, 3 years for the riservas. Like Brunello, these wines tend to be a rich, powerful and age-worthy example of Sangiovese.
Vernaccia di San Gimignano - This is a white grape, Vernaccia, grown around the medieval hill town of San Gimignano. Considered to be one of Italy's best native white wines, they tend to be very dry, with a stony minerality.
Veneto - Although the Veneto as a whole is less well known, some of the wines produced there are very famous. In particular, the heady, rich wines called Amarone are born here alongside the Valpolicellas. Some of the best examples of Italian sparkling wines, Prosecco, and some whites are also produced here.
Piedmont - In the northwest of Italy lies the foggy hillsides of Piedmont. These hills produce some of the most profound and sought-after wines of Italy, particularly the complex and seductive wines of Barolo and Barbaresco, made from the Nebbiolo grape. But there is a wealth of other wines available too, at more affordable prices, including Barbera, Dolcetto and even sparkling wines.
Tuscany - Tuscany is likely Italy's most famous region worldwide, both for tourists and wine lovers. The countryside of Florence is full of wine producing appellations. Classically most famous for the wine practically synonymous with Italian wine, Chianti, there are many other sub-regions and styles of wine produced from Tuscany.
Bordeaux - One of the most famous wine producing regions in the world, Bordeaux is best known for its powerful red wines which can age well for decades. Based on several grape varieties that are very well known around the world, including Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot, there are many sub-appellations and even dry and sweet white wines made in Bordeaux.
Burgundy - Potentially one of the most seductive and fascinating wines in the world, yet also controversial and hard to grasp at times, this complex region is limited in the grapes that can be grown, but complex in the sub-regions, producers and styles that result. Burgundy produces both red wines (principally from Pinot Noir) and white wines (principally from Chardonnay).
Champagne - The most famous sparkling wine on the planet, Champagne is practically synonymous with celebration, elegance, wealth and even excess. Yet the wines themselves can be some of the most compelling and seductive from anywhere. Most of the wine produced from this French wine region is sparkling and white or rosé, produced mostly from three grapes, Chardonnay, Pinot Noir and Pinot Meunier.
Loire Valley - The Loire river valley covers a large swath of western France all the way to the Atlantic. Along its length are a huge number of appellations producing wines of all types from many different grape varieties. The is truly one of the largest of the French wine regions.
Rhone - The Rhône valley in France is the home to many wine producing appellations along its banks and surrounding hills. It is generally separated into the Northern Rhone and the Southern Rhone. The red wines from the north are primarily made from Syrah with small amounts of white wine produced as well. The south can grow a number of different red grapes including grenache, mourvedre and syrah and is best known the small appellation of Chateauneuf-du-Pape.
Northern Rhone Valley - The Northern Rhone is home to Côte Rôtie and Hermitage, two of the most famous French wine regions. Producing both red wines mostly from Syrah and a number of white wines as well, this is a small but fascinating region.
Southern Rhone Valley - The Southern Rhone is home to Chateauneuf-du-Pape, a wine blended from a number of different grape varieties. However, there are several other appellations in this region. The wines tend to be wild and sauvage but can have great complexity and finesse.
Sauvignon Blanc - One of the most famous grapes of the Loire is Sauv Blanc. Many wine drinkers don't even realize it is a Loire grape since it has been adopted by so many other regions in the new and old world alike. For example, California, New Zealand, South Africa and many others make many fine examples of the grape. Yet, the most classic and arguably the best come from Loire regions as well as Bordeaux (not in the Loire) where it makes up at least some of the blend of most white Bordeaux wines. In the Loire, the two most famous appellations for Sauv Blanc are certainly Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé, although it is also the principal grape in a number of other appellations including Quincy, Cheverny, Reuilly, and others. In general, the grape produces wines that are crisp and dry with a taut mineral or citrus acid component. Their specific flavors can vary but they are often fruity, with an aroma similar to gooseberries, along with some non-fruit aromas like hay, grass, gunflint or slate. Like most white Loire valley wines, most wines see little or no oak influence and remain bright and fresh, zesty and lively.
Chenin Blanc - Chenin blanc really reaches its peak of perfection in the wines of the Loire Valley. Although it has been grown elsewhere, it rarely achieves much success in other regions. Although it can be grown in many regions of the Loire, it is certainly most famous for two general regions. Not far from the city of Tours, Vouvray is one of the most famous. Further west, the general region of Anjou, that contains several small appellations, is also mostly Chenin blanc. Some of the famous appellations here include Savennières, Quarts de Chaume, Coteaux du Layon and others. The Loire Valley wines made from Chenin blanc can vary quite a bit. It is a grape capable of making everything from bone dry wines of great mineral intensity to sticky sweet dessert wines, and everything in between. For example, the dry wines of Vouvray Sec and Savennieres have an intensity to them that can be breathtaking with mineral and other nuances and can be capable of long aging. On the other end of the spectrum, the late harvest Vouvray and Quarts de Chaumes are deep and rich with intense sweetness, yet almost always balanced by firm acidity that keeps them from being cloying.
Melon de Bourgogne - Although this often misunderstood grape is named for Burgundy (Bourgogne), it is best known for its Loire Valley wines, most notably those from Muscadet. I say it is misunderstood because grown almost anywhere else on the planet and it is a boring, insipid wine that is far from noble. However, in the best hands and from the best vineyards in the western edge of the Loire valley, this "lowly" grape is capable of greatness. While there are oceans of banal wine made in Muscadet, there are also hidden gems that are still relatively inexpensive since they are largely misunderstood and underappreciated. For less than $20, the best Muscadet can be stunning, with a pristine, clarity and vibrancy to them. They are not big or fruity wines. But what they lack in fruity complexity they make up for in minerality, sea brine, granite and more. These shimmering wines are classic pairings to raw seafood and other lighter fare.
Cabernet Franc - A lot of people think of mostly white wines when they think of Loire Valley wine, probably because of the popularity of Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé. However, there are some stunning red wines grown as well, most notably from the Cabernet Franc grape, a cousin of the more famous Cabernet Sauvignon. While Cab Franc is also grown in Bordeaux, it is usually not much more than a minor component of those red blends, with Cab Sauv and Merlot often making up much more of the wine. However, in some appellations in the Loire, it is the predominant grape. Most notably, the wines of Chinon and Bourgueil are capable of producing fascinating wines that vary from light and fruity to dark, deep and complex. The most serious of these wines are capable of great complexity and can age quite a long time. But many are made to be fruitier and more approachable young as well.
Muscadet - This once maligned appellation has made a comeback and is now on a roll. The top producers are making stunning wines of profound minerality and reverberating energy.
Sancerre - One of the more famous regions in the Loire makes almost exclusively crisp, dry white white from the Sauvignon Blanc grape, although a small amount of red and rose are produced as well.
Vouvray - Vouvray is one of the kings of the Chenin Blanc grape. Producing everything from dry, intense wines to sticky sweet dessert wines, the best producers here can be absolutely stunning.
St. Joseph - St. Joseph produces mostly red wines from Syrah that can be quite good substitutes for the more expensive Hermitages. They have similar characteristics but tend to be a bit more rustic and less complex. They can be good values from the best producers.
Cornas - Cornas makes red wines from Syrah that are known for their deep, dark intensity. They are the blackest of Rhone wines with a remarkably deep color. The aromas and flavors also tend to be firmer, with a deep, intense minerality and smokiness which makes me think of black volcanic smoke and stone. While the lesser examples can be quite hard and rustic, the best examples can be complex, passionate and long-lived.
Crozes-Hermitage - Although it has the name Hermitage in it, don't confuse this appellation with the true Hermitage. These represent more of a value because they tend not to cost nearly as much as Hermitage, but the price difference is for good reason. This appellation does not have nearly the terroir that Hermitage does. That being said, good examples can still be very nice red Rhone wines with a smokey complexity to them and dark, rich fruit.
Northern Côtes du Rhône - Some areas in the Northern Rhone can produce wines labeled as Côtes du Rhône, although more of it comes from the Southern Rhone. These tend to be less expensive, and also less distinctive, examples. But again, from a great producer, they can still be very nice wines that offer good value.
Condrieu - Condrieu is perhaps the most famous white producing village in the Rhone. It produces wines exclusively from Viognier. The wines tend to be vibrantly aromatic, with a pretty perfume of honeysuckle and other flowers. Viognier is a relatively low acid variety of white grape so the wines tend to be round and soft in the mouth, meant to be drunk young for the large majority of examples. The best can be quite expensive but do offer a unique and complex wine that is not quite like most other famous white wines.
Chateau Grillet - Although the name sounds like an individual property, not an appellation, Chateau Grillet is in fact the name of an appellation near Condrieu. It is owned and farmed by a single producer however. It is a tiny appellation and can almost be considered an enclave of Condrieu. Like its neighbor, it produces only white wine from the Viognier grape.
Chateauneuf-du-Pape - The most famous and regal of the southern Rhone appellations, Chateauneuf du Pape ("the new home of the pope") generally makes wines that fetch the highest prices, get the highest ratings and will age the longest of all these wines. The reds can be a blend of up to 13 grate varieties but are usually predominantly Grenache with variable amounts of Syrah, Mourvedre and various other grapes depending on the vineyard and producer. The wines tend to be fruity but with a wild, sauvage complexity and chewy texture. They often have Provençal aromas of herbs like lavender, rosemary and thyme, but yet have an earthy meatiness that runs the length of the wine, giving it a chewy and wild texture. The more modern styled wines can be quite ripe and suave (it is not far from the warm Mediterranean coast after all!) but the traditional wines are on the more rustic side, with wild, brambly fruit, stoney minerality and abundant structure. A small amount of white is made in Chateauneuf as well and can be a round, plump wine with an earthy complexity. The old vine examples made from mostly Roussanne can be striking, especially the example from Beaucastel.
Southern Côtes du Rhône - The Cotes du Rhone appellation is huge in the southern Rhone valley. While the Cotes du Rhones from the north tend to be mostly Syrah, in the south they are often styled after Chateauneuf, with a blend of Grenache and other grapes. However, it is impossible to generalize as the wines with this label can be anything from cheap swill to quite dense, complex and age-worthy examples. Stick to the best producers and you can find some great values in this category, both for whites and reds.
Vacqueyras - The large bulk of these wines are red and while they have a fair amount of Grenache, they often have a healthy dollop of Syrah. These are some of the darkest and most structured wines of the south, often appearing almost black in the glass. While they have intense structure and density, they often lack a bit in elegance. They tend more toward the rustic, burly side of the spectrum. While powerful, they lack the noble breed of their neighbors from Chateauneuf and even from Gigondas. They can be excellent values for a powerful, dark red wine.
Gigondas - Another neighbor of Chateauneuf, Gigonadas is almost always predominately Grenache, although it can blend other grapes like its neighbors. It tends to be chewy and wild yet having a silky, elegant side to it, at its best. It can resemble Chateauneuf, although it rarely quite reaches the heights that the more famous appellation attains. But again, this can be a stupendous value for the better wines, nearly eclipsing its more famous neighbor in quality, complexity and elegance.
Beaumes de Venise - While a small amount of red can be made under the first appellation name, the most famous wine from this region is the later, the Muscat de Beaumes de Venise. These sweet white wines from the Muscat grape, at their best, can be fresh and fruity, lively and fun. They are not dense, age-worthy sweet whites like a Sauternes or German Trockenbeerenauslese. Instead, they are wines with a softer structure that are easy to drink younger but have a floral and fruity essence that can be intoxicating (and impossible not to like, except for masochists). Pour half the bottle over a glass of fruit salad and serve the rest alongside for a summer dessert and your guests will be quite pleased!
Tavel - This is a unique appellation in the southern Rhone that is 100% devoted to Rosé wine. Made from the same grapes as elsewhere in the Southern Rhone, the best Tavel Roses are both fruity and refreshing but also a bit wild, dark, complex and earthy. Good rosé is wildly underrated in the US and these can be awesome values for sublime summer wines that won't break the back yet are irresistible and food friendly.

