word - description
Austere - Austere means "severe or strict in manner, attitude or appearance". For a wine this is used to describe a wine which is quite wound up and tight or not showing lush, ripe fruit. This is not necessarily a bad thing as many young wines that are meant to age will be quite austere in their youth, showing abundant acid and/or tannin structure, but will open up nicely with age. This is approximately the opposite of "fruit forward", fruity, lush and/or opulent.
Bouquet - The perfume of a wine. A wine's bouquet is generally only described as such if the aromas are particularly complex, with many aromas in harmony, and/or floral. The aroma of a wine which is simple or not particularly pretty would not typically called its bouquet or perfume.
Cassis - One of the most common wine descriptions in tasting notes, cassis is a syrupy liqueur made with black currants. Often used to describe wines with a sweet aroma of ripe currants, such as Cabernet Sauvignon and other rich, dark grapes. Not to be confused with Cassis, the village in Provence on the French Mediterranean coast which produces a crisp, dry white wine.
Complex - A complex wine is one which has a plethora of aromas and flavors, generally harmonizing in a way that makes for a beautiful sensory experience. The best wines in the world are very complex when mature with many different facets of flavor and aromas. The opposite wine descriptions would be "simple" or one dimensional.
Concentrated - A concentrated wine is one which is richly flavored with a high concentration of flavor. This is the opposite of "thin", "watery", or "bland".
Corpulent - Corpulent literally means fat. While this is generally not used as a compliment when referring to a person, it is usually a compliment to a wine which is big and rich and has a round, full feel in the mouth. Usually used to describe very full-bodied wines.
Creosote - Creosote is a dark brown oil distilled from coal tar. It is also used to describe the build up of crusted, oily black material that forms in chimneys. It is used to describe a wine which has a tarry, smokey aroma resembling these things, usually rich red wines. This aroma can come from oak barrels used to age the wine if the oak was heavily charred prior to use.
Density - The density of a wine is how concentrated its flavors are. So a wine with a lot of density can also be said to be concentrated.
Depth - While depth can be used to refer to the density, size and concentration of a wine, it is more appropriately used to describe a sense of many layers of flavors and "stuffing" in the wine. The opposite of a thin or superficial wine, it is a wine which has layers of flavors to explore and a sense that it has a lot "hidden under its hood".
Elegant - One of the hallmarks of a great wine is its mouthfeel, or its texture in your mouth. Great wines generally have a well put together feel that has no hard edges. Elegant is one of the wine descriptions often used to describe a wine with a great mouthfeel, a wine that is pretty, complete and has no hard edges.
Ethereal - The definition of ethereal is "extremely delicate and light in a way that seems too perfect for this world". This description is used to describe wines that glide over the palate with a silky, soft texture that almost feels like it is not a liquid, more like a spirit of a wine gliding over your palate. This is usually used to describe wines that have that unique and hard to find characteristic of being both intense in flavor and complex, yet at the same time paradoxically light on its feet.
Forward - A wine which is easy to understand and appreciate. As opposed to an austere or tight wine, this is a wine whose flavors are right out front for you to appreciate. Not hesitant or shy. In your face.
Grip - Great wines have grip on the palate, a sense of texture and traction that grabs your palate and gives the other flavors in the wine balance. This usually results from the wine's structure of acid and/or tannin. Without grip, a wine will feel flabby, simple or juicy.
Jammy - Like jam, a wine with big, very ripe fruit. Usually reserved for wines with an almost sweet, sticky texture of ripe fruit flavors. Sometimes used to describe a wine which does not have adequate structure to stand up to that sweet, ripe fruit.
Laser-like - This is one of the wine descriptions used to describe a wine with a vibrant, shimmering, "linear" feel to it. As opposed to an opulent or jammy wine, a laser-like wine has bright acidity and focused flavors that cut a sharp swath across your palate. Very commonly used to describe wines with pristine, intense acidic structure such as Savenniè:res, German, Austrian and Alsatian Rieslings, among others.
Layered - This is one of the subjective wine descriptions of a wine which feels like it has layers of flavor, as opposed to a simple wine which is one dimensional. A complex with with "layers" of flavor, density and extract that coat your palate.
Lush - Similar to opulent, a luxuriant wine that coats the palate with forward, pretty flavors. Not austere or closed up.
Intense - This is one of the wine descriptions used to describe a wine with flavors that stand up and make themselves known. Bold and bright flavors that hit your palate with a strong impact. This does not necessarily mean a full-bodied wine, an intense wine, whether big or lighter, is bright and powerful in the way it hits your palate.
Minerally - Minerality is the characteristic of having mineral-like flavors in the wine. Wine, after all, is grown in vines that sit in earth and can absorb things in that vineyard, such as components of rocks and minerals, which can influence the flavors of the wine. Many people would argue that for many types of wine, minerals in the aromas and or flavors is a necessity for greatness. These minerally aromas and flavors can present in many different ways, from chalk, to pencil lead, to stones, to granite, to slate, to gunflint, to petrol, to oyster shell, to salt, to gravel. All of these are somewhat related and often described as mineral flavors.
Mocha - Mocha is coffee flavored with chocolate. Many rich red wines, particularly those with a significant amount of oak aging, can get these wine descriptions. These flavors can be partially from the grapes themselves and partially from the oak aging. Very common in Bordeaux wines, particularly those from the Right Bank with a significant proportion of Merlot.
Monolithic - A big wine, but lacking flavor complexity. Usually a big, slightly clumsy, inelegant wine which is full-bodied, with big flavor, but not much complexity.
Opulent - "Ostentatiously rich and luxuriant or lavish", opulent is often used similarly to lush and unctuous. It is used to describe very rich, lush, fat and round wines that coat the palate with layers of flavor.
Pain grille - Literally "grilled bread" or "toast", this aroma can be found in many wines. It is one of the wine descriptions used to describe a wine with a smokey, toasted bread aroma or flavor. Again, this can sometimes come from the wine itself or can be imparted to the wine by the oak aging as the insides of oak barrels are variably toasted prior to use.
Quince - Quince is a fruit, related to apples and pears, that is often used to make jam, jelly and pudding.
Refined - Refined wine is pure, elegant and without blemish. A regal wine which does not have rough edges or imperfections.
Reglisse - The French term for licorice root (black licorice), the aroma and flavors of which can often be found in red wines.
Rich - Concentrated and dense with flavor, as opposed to thin, watery or bland.
Silky - A wine description of the wine's texture, being fine and like silk. The opposite of rough or rustic.
Smoke - All sorts of smoke-like aromas can be found in wines. Some of this can be caused by the oak aging the wine receives but some wines have it on its own. For example, some wines made of Syrah are described as having a smokey bacon aroma.
Stone - Smelling or tasting stones in a wine is not uncommon. This is one of the common wine descriptions for a wine with stone-like mineral flavors. Some tasters will go as far as to describe the type of stone, such as granite, slate, chalk, or flint.
Torrefaction - Torrefaction is the process of roasting as is used in roasting coffee beans. The process produces typical aromas that we associate with roasted coffee and chocolate-like aromas. Wines with significant roasted qualities are sometimes described as exhibiting torrefaction.
Unctuous - "Having a greasy or soapy feel" literally, this is used to describe wines that have a very rich, creamy texture in the mouth that coats the palate.
Vanillin - Vanillin is the name for a fragrant compound that is the principle component of vanilla. So why don't we just say a wine smells of vanilla? Well, you can, but people tend to say vanillin to indicate that the aroma or flavor came from another source. French oak barrels are a common source of a bit of a vanillin aroma and flavor.
Velvety - Like silky, these are wine descriptions for the texture or mouthfeel of a wine. Although they are often used interchangeably, some would argue that a velvety wine is a bit more coarse than a silky wine, silky being the epitome of the most elegant, fine and refined wines.
Balanced - Balanced wines are “like a hug,” says Davogustto. The fruit, acidity and tannins are harmonious, and no one characteristic “jumps out first.” That’s opposed to linear or angular wines that attack the palate before their full character is revealed.
Bright - Bright generally means “lively and higher in acid,” says Rudzinski, which often translates to easy-drinking. Pitts thinks of bright wines like laser beams. “[They’re] pure and focused,” she says. “You can taste and visualize the wine. You know exactly what’s happening on your palate.” Pitts points to Dr. Konstantin Frank’s Finger Lakes Grüner Veltliner as a good example of a bright wine.
Bold - Bold wines are “fruit-forward with structure and backbone,” says Brian Grandison, sommelier at The Surf Club in Miami. When Hon thinks of bold wines, Barolo and Brunello come to mind, with their pronounced tannins and darker fruit. Hon says “bold” can translate into higher alcohol content, but it doesn’t necessarily mean heavy, a term he has stopped using. Rather than bold, Wanda Mann, founder of Wine With Wanda, prefers to describe these wines as “va va voom.”
Confident - RdV Vineyards winemaker Joshua Grainer says a confident wine is one “that shows great balance and poise, avoiding extremes of ripeness or manipulation and true to its origin and or variety.” To achieve this, it means to increase vine age, better understanding of microclimates and precision in the cellar. In addition to RdV’s 2016 Lost Mountain blend of Merlot, Cabernet Sauvignon and Cabernet Franc, Grainer also points to Opus One, particularly the 2014 bottling, as example of a confident wine.
Creamy - Creamy wines are all about mouthfeel, says Hon. They often have lower acid, some age and have spent time in wooden barrels and/or on the lees. He thinks of oak-forward wines from the southern Rhȏne, or aged Champagnes with a mouthful of soft bubbles. Nikki Goddard, an Oakland-based wine writer, uses dairy and creamy qualities to help wine lovers understand body. “Light-bodied wines feel like water in your mouth, medium-bodied wines feel like skim milk, full-bodied wines are like whole milk, or even cream, in the case of some dessert wines,” she says.
Elegant - When Pitts says that a wine is elegant, she means that the fruit tastes cared for, and she can tell a lot of thought went into its production. She finds certain aged, high-elevation wines taste elegant. Davogustto pictures “Grace Kelly in a glass.” She points to the medium-light body, crisp acidity and soft tannins that you find in Joan D’Anguera’s 2017 Altaroses Garnacha from Montsant.
Frenetic - Jeff Segal, owner of Domestique wine shop in Washington, D.C., loves to talk about a wine’s energy. He describes some of his favorite natural wines as frenetic. “They’re unpredictable, uncontrolled, vibrant and exciting,” says Segal. “When a wine is frenetic, it’s not a wine that you can pin down with a simple tasting note. It’s always shifting and forcing you to reconsider.”
Fun - If Davogustto senses that a guest is up for an adventure, she’ll sell them a “fun” wine. This could mean something from the Canary Islands, a rosé from Virginia or another variety or region guests are less likely to have encountered elsewhere. These wines strike her as fun because “you don’t know what you’re going to get. They’re easy to drink, but they also surprise you.”
Grippy - When a wine’s tannins are “a little pronounced and almost too much,” perhaps like a young Bordeaux, it’s grippy, says Jeff Harding, wine director at New York City’s Waverly Inn. “But just when you think it’s too much and too distracting, you’re like, ‘No, it’s just right.’”
Heady - Pitts uses heady instead of “aggressive” or “strong” to describe higher-alcohol wines. She also deploys the term figuratively to talk about cerebral wines in their tasting sweet spot, like a 2000 Château Margaux.
Juicy - For Rudzinski, juicy wines, embodied by Beaujolais and its principal grape Gamay, are “bursting with fruit.” This often means berries and red stone fruits that are “ripe in the summertime, freshly picked with juice running down your chin.”
Lean - Just talking about lean wines makes Rebekah Pineda, brand and content manager at Domestique, stand a little straighter. “It’s a word that communicates an idea and feeling beyond the literal translation,” she says. “Lean whites are steely, like marathon runners, or they’re slightly on edge, like a broke college student trying to escape dinner barely spending anything.” While a full-bodied wine tastes rich and lush, lean connotes tightness and focus. “As a minimalist, lean is the highest compliment reserved for old-vine, grey-slate Riesling, or the affordable Pépière Clos de Briords [Muscadet],” says Pineda.
Lush - Lush wines have the body and concentrated flavor of a bold wine, but they are “velvety and silky smooth with less tannins,” says Grandison.
Nervy - Harding says that nervy bottles have what borders on too much acid, but they’re “just right and keep grabbing your attention.” Goddard prefers to call these high-acid wines, like dry German Riesling, Muscadet, Loire Valley Chenin Blanc and Chablis, “mouth-puckering,” instead.
Porch pounder - Porch pounders are “easy and uncomplicated wines that you should chill and drink quickly,” says Alexi Cashen, CEO of Elenteny Imports. Pitts refers to these bottles as “patio wine,” or wines to drink around the pool. “They remind me of sunshine,” she says. Many rosés fit the bill, as do pours of Pinot Grigio.
Purity - Tim Elenteny, owner of Elenteny Imports, considers purity a measure of the style in which a wine is made. If a wine is focused and true to variety or regional style, it’s a pure expression.
Punchy - Big, young reds that “punch you in the sides of your face” with tannins are what Jillian Stern, estate ambassador at Napa’s White Rock Vineyards, considers punchy wines. Examples might include young Malbecs, Cabernets or Tannats.
Rustic - Pitts says rustic wines are everyday drinking reds, best paired with a meal. Wines from Burgundy’s Irancy appellation, along with certain Barberas, Syrahs and Grenache from the Côtes du Rhône, are examples. Harding says that rustic wines often have a lingering finish, pleasant but not zippy acidity and, occasionally, some barnyard aromas.
Snappy - Hon sells lots of chilled, snappy white wines, which means bottles like Chablis, dry Riesling and Albariño. Elenteny also likes to use snappy for “crisp, clean, dry white wines.”
Smooth - Stern has dropped smooth from her wine vocabulary. “It’s my pet peeve,” she says. “All wines should be smooth. That descriptor belongs with hard liquor, not wine.” Still, smooth resonates with guests who want a “light- to medium-bodied red with velvety tannins,” says Iris Fabre, assistant manager at London’s Real Drinks and founder of Wine Minute. Rudzinski points to a French idiom taught to her by the late Jean-Luc Le Dû to describe a good, smooth wine: “le petit Jesus en culotte de velours” (or “baby Jesus in velvet underpants”).
Tension - For Grainer, wines with tension display an elegant, ageworthy structure, “achieved when craftsmanship marries seamlessly with the pedigree of the terroir, or the wine’s unique sense of place.” For Harding, tension lies at the intersection of grippy and nervy, exemplified by wines like Sylvain Pataille’s Fleur de Pinot Marsannay Rosé from Burgundy. “It’s vibrating with energy, whether from acid or texture or fruitiness and weight, and it’s a constant dance of components all perfectly strung together, all competing for your attention,” he says. “It’s like when a dancer leaps impossibly high, and you think that they’re gonna fall, but they land and continue on their way. You just can’t take your eyes off.”