question - answer
Barolo or Brunello? - At their core, these wines showcase two of Italy’s most noble grape varieties, each with its own distinct personality and challenges. Both are known for high tannins, loads of acidity and, in monovarietal form, expressing their specific terroir with great detail and nuance. They are reserved varieties and begin to show themselves and what direction they want to go after a few days of fermentation.
Tuscan or Piedmontese wine? - Much of it comes down to Montalcino under the Tuscany sun versus Barolo under the Piedmontese fog. The soils are extremely different and Sangiovese has a better attitude to resist warmer climates than Nebbiolo. The approximately 600-square-meter Brunello appellation, which expands out from the hilltop city of Montalcino, is surrounded by rivers on three sides as well as an extinct volcano that helps to moderate the winds. This unique topography is what makes Brunello di Montalcino bottlings sing. in Barolo, wines are generally known for their wafting aromas that hint toward crushed raspberries or macerating cherries, laced with notes of dried rose, truffle and incense. Barolos are elegant and graceful with the power and agility of a ballet dancer. Though they do share common characteristics, Silvia Altare of Elio Altare in Barolo also emphasizes the importance of site-specificity in the region.
Where Are Late-Harvest Wines Produced? - In Germany, there are varying degrees of ripeness beyond late harvest: Auslese (selected harvest), Beerenauslese (berry selection) and Trockenberenausleese (dry berry selection). But late-harvest wines aren’t limited to Germany. In Bordeaux, the Sauternes region produces acclaimed wines using Semillon, Sauvignon Blanc and Muscadelle. Northeastern Hungary is known for Tokaji Aszú, a prized dessert wine composed of Furmint, Hárslevelű and our other grape varieties. Eiswein (also known as Ice Wine) is often produced in Canada, Austria, Germany and the United States and is made with grapes that are left to freeze on the vine from December through late February, long after the traditional harvest period. These sweet wines are also made in lesser-known regions, too. There is a very special grape indigenous to Ankara, the capital of Turkey, that is often used in dessert wine called ‘Kalecik Karasi,’ as well as a grape called Bornova Misketi (100% Turkish Muscat) coming from Izmir, the city on the Aegean side of Turkey.
What Does a Late-Harvest Wine Taste Like? - Expect a late-harvest wine to have a deeper and more concentrated body. The fruit flavors of the wine will move from the realm of crunchy ‘fresh fruit’ and bright flavors to something riper and usually more oxidative. For example, ripe apples magically transform into candied apricots and peaches; with red wines, richer flavors and showcase some raisin or dehydrated flavors, while late-harvest white wines lend themselves to honeyed and candied fruit flavors. Elevated sugar content acts as a natural preservative, which is a core reason that late-harvest wines are able to age terrifically. If the wine in question is made from a high acid grape, such as Riesling or Sauvignon Blanc, that can buy it an even longer lifespan.
What’s the Difference Between Late Harvest and Noble Rot? - While many of the most famous late-harvest wines (like Sauternes and Tokaji Aszu) are also impacted by noble rot, the two processes are unrelated in the vineyard. Noble rot refers to Botrytis cinerea, a beneficial fungus that can grow on grapes and dry them out while concentrating sugars; late harvest, on the other hand, refers to the time that the grapes are harvested. Botrytis very famously presents with saffron and honey aromas, which, when balanced, add terrific complexity and depth to the finished wines. While late-harvest wines will generally give the honeyed, intense fruit presentation, the spice and complexity added by noble rot is truly the distinguishing factor.
Where is Sonoma County? - Sonoma County, just an hour north of San Francisco, might not have the international reputation that the neighboring Napa Valley does, but it still has plenty for wine lovers to be excited about. This historic region was first planted in the early 1800s and has grown wine grapes ever since. It boasts a dizzying array of climates and soil types, making it an ideal home for a wide range of varietals and wine styles. From crisp, refreshing whites to full-bodied and age-worthy reds, there’s something for every palate.
How is the Chardonnay from Sonoma County? - Chardonnay is the single most popular grape in the county—red or white. And why not? Winemakers love working with Burgundian varietal, as it can be made in a wide range of styles, from heavily oaked and decadent, to mineral-driven and acid-forward. This versatility gives wine lovers loads of options, but the classic examples from the Russian River Valley really deliver the best of both worlds. It’s no wonder these wines have exploded in popularity since the AVA was founded in the early eighties—and have helped cement California’s reputation as a global wine powerhouse. Foggy mornings and a long growing season provide brilliant acidity, while warm days provide optimal ripeness and opulent texture. The ability to have the best of both worlds has made Chardonnay from this region popular all over the world.
How is the Pinot Noir from Sonoma County? - Ask wine lovers what the most complex grape is and often, you’ll hear about Pinot Noir. Ask growers which variety is the toughest to farm and you’re very likely to get the same answer. Pinot’s thin skin and relatively high acid make for nuanced and aromatically compelling wines, and the grape thrives in cooler growing zones. The AVAs located along Sonoma County’s coastline, such as Fort Ross-Seaview and West Sonoma Coast, share a proximity to the Pacific Ocean and foggy mornings that provide the perfect climate for gradual ripening and complex flavor profiles, like forest floor, nori and shiitake, making them ideal for this tricky but magical grape.
What is the Cabernet Sauvignon from Sonoma County like? - Just over the Mayacamas Mountains, in Napa Valley, Cabernet Sauvignon is king. The wines from the western side of this range in the Moon Mountain and Sonoma Valley AVAs can be just as age worthy and satisfying and are generally more affordable. Here, Cabernet is supple and nuanced, with lower alcohol and less overt oak treatment. Collectors have long known to find value here, but nowadays, top estates in Sonoma are producing truly world class examples of Cabernet with flavors of plum, cassis and volcanic character that belong in every serious cellar.
What is the Zinfandel from Sonoma County like? - Among the earliest plantings in Sonoma County, Zinfandel was prized by early settlers from Hungary and Italy. These robust reds (frequently planted alongside Petite Sirah, Alicante Bouschet, Carignane and other Rhône varieties) have stood the test of time, with many of California’s oldest plantings of “old-vine Zin” dating back well over a century. Lytton Springs, Pagani Ranch, Mancini Ranch, Jackass Hill and Monte Rosso are some of the most sought-after parcels, with winemakers and collectors alike seeking out sources for these uniquely American wines. While it’s tricky to generalize the flavors in these types of wines, as the mix of other varieties can really change the profile, it’s safe to say that they all carry some intense berry character and spice notes. The Russian River Valley and Dry Creek Valley both have a number of these historic sites, as do Sonoma Valley and Moon Mountain.
What's the Syrah like in Sonoma County? - A frequent addition to the vine rows that make up many of those old vine field blends, Syrah has come into its own in Sonoma’s coastal regions. The cool nights, foggy mornings and steep hillsides in west Sonoma Coast and Fort Ross-Seaview are the perfect climate for an aromatically enchanting and lower alcohol style of Syrah than those generally grown in Napa Valley or the Central Coast. These wines tend to possess more than a little bit of the classic Northern Rhône Valley Syrah character, displaying black olive and bacon flavors, but retain a distinct California depth and richness.
What's the Grenache like in Sonoma County? - The Rhône Valley’s other noble variety, Grenache, also carved out a niche for itself as a member of those “mixed black” varieties planted around the county so long ago. Grenache has long been popular with growers, as it thrives in bright, sunny locations and provides a hefty crop more often than not. In Sonoma, it can be soft and fruit driven or hearty and potent, depending on the location. But it thrives in areas with volcanic soils, like the rocky slopes of Moon Mountain, where it sings with added complexity and beguiling notes like kirsch, purple flowers and savory spices.
Your thoughts on the Sangiovese from Sonoma County? - The noble grape of Tuscany came to California with Italian immigrants early on and gained steam after the turn of the century, when Edoardo Seghesio purchased ten acres of land in Sonoma. Those Sangiovese vineyards gave birth to a uniquely American clone of the classic Chianti varietal, featuring robust cherry and raspberry flavors with layers of spice and minerality. The booming rise of Zinfandel in the eighties and nineties brought more attention to the Italian-American growers, and eventually the so-called Cal-Ital wines blossomed in popularity. While Sangiovese still makes up a small fraction of Sonoma County’s acreage, its historic significance shouldn’t be overlooked.
What do you think of the Sauvignon Blanc in Sonoma County? - Sauvignon Blanc is among the world’s most popular white wines; it’s grown all over, in a wide range of different styles. Examples from New Zealand are racy and intense, while the classic versions from Bordeaux are deep and nuanced. The best versions from Sonoma County tend to come from hilly growing zones like Bennett Valley and Pine Mountain-Cloverdale Peak, where the wines are made with the richer Bordeaux style in mind. Layered and textural, with brilliant acidity and classic California fruit, like Meyer lemon, pomelo and melon, Sonoma’s best Sauvignon Blancs compete with the world’s greatest.
Best overall wine to pair with steak? - It’s hard to argue against a well-made Napa Cab as the ideal partner for all types of steak. There’s a reason most steakhouses have Bible-sized wine lists disproportionately filled with Napa Cabernet Sauvignon. Few wines deliver the kind of high-alcohol and tannic body blow required to tangle with such a full-flavored protein. A glass of Napa Cabernet Sauvignon can help the flavors linger for longer. The buttery-black sear on a good steak also mirrors the toast of the oak barrels Napa Cabs are aged in, allowing the char and the tannin to merge while the wine’s considerable fruits dart through.
What should I pair with a New York strip steak? - Sometimes known as sirloin, top loin, Delmonico steak or Kansas City strip, it’s an incredibly versatile cut that can take the flavors of a unique style of Napa Cab. Most will recognize the New York strip as the Broadway-sized intersection of texture, flavor and fat that made it so famous. One sub-AVA announces itself as the strip’s most natural counterpart: St. Helena AVA from The Valley floor. It’s a powerful expression of Jolly Rancher fruits, like cranberry and raspberry, with a savory jamminess and violet-laced cedar core that drops a big, red Times Square ball of flavor on any New York strip.
How should I pair a nice Ribeye Steak? - Ribeye is the richest cut of steak, lusciously marbled with fat throughout. This is where you can really play with the interaction between tannins and beef fat. I recommend Napa's hillside AVAs, like Diamond Mountain. These wines are so rugged and burly, they almost seem chewy, with a wet-dark earthiness. If you aren’t careful, they might be just brawny enough to make you grab that meat by the bone. It can be even more fun to experiment with some lesser-known high-tannin wines, like Tannat, Petit Verdot, Mourvedre, Sagrantino or Touriga Nacional. These rarely have as worthy a culinary opponent as a ribeye steak. Uruguay consumes the second most beef per capita of any country in the world, so wine from a steak-loving, wine-growing area feels natural. After all, there are few Uruguayan asados without bottles of Tannat on the table.
Best Italian for steak? - While classic Italian reds like Barolo, Barbaresco, Brunello and Amarone can pair beautifully with a juicy cut of meat, I suggest heading to Tuscany for a superior choice. I encourage pouring a Super Tuscan, the colloquial name for wines that operate outside the rules of such Tuscany DOCGs as Chianti and Brunello. These wines most often blend Sangiovese with Bordeaux varieties like Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Cabernet Franc and Petit Verdot. Super Tuscan styles can vary, but what they all share is a unique broadside of freshness and power, and a juiciness that snaps to attention with a powerful piece of protein. The wine’s guaranteed acidic streak and beefy tannins from all the thick-skinned grapes work overtime to provide an Old World pairing akin to its New World brethren, with interestingly nuanced differences.
What's a good French wine for steak? - While it may make sense to pour a Cabernet Sauvignon when going French, I suggest another Bordeaux favorite. Consider a Merlot, particularly one from Pomerol, the right bank Bordeaux appellation where Merlot shows its well-known plushness and considerable tannic structure. Pomerol produces Merlot that smells like so many things at once it can leave you guessing for days. Think black plum, black cherry and boysenberry with notes of violet, tobacco leaf and mint. Depending on the producer, Pomerol ranges from medium-bodied and supple, to big-bodied and bold. But every last one of its iterations is a cuddle puddle of lust for steak au poivre.
Wine pairing for steak & lobster? - Though pairing red wine with seafood isn’t off the table, there are white wine varieties bold enough to stand up to this classic surf and turf. Warm-climate Chardonnay that's been barrel-aged or barrel-fermented is intense enough to match flavorful red meat as well as the naturally sweet lobster. Also, Pinot Noir has minimal tannins compared to heavier reds, but it's still enough to work with red meat without overpowering the lobster. When ordering surf and turf, go for a leaner steak, like filet mignon. Leaner cuts such as filet mignon are great pairings for these 'crossover' wines that pair well with both meat and seafood.
Recommend me a good Rosé to go with steak. - When it comes to pouring a pink-hued wine with a fatty steak, I suggest opting for Champagne. The effervescence cuts the fat and also refreshes the palate, while the red and citrus fruit match the intensity of the beef flavors. The yeasty bread component gives complexity and complementary flavors. The florals round out the experience and can match all cuts of steak because of the diverse flavors and complex structure of the wine.
Best wine for steak tartare? - Raw steak is naturally lighter in intensity and many tartare recipes include tart, contrasting flavors and deeply savory herbs. Rosé is the best of both white and red worlds. It has red and citrus fruit profiles, lifted with florals and often a mineral or stony baseline of flavor. They are also moderate in body to match the body of the tartare, and have enough acidity to complement the interesting flavors.
Advise me on Pinot Noir for steak. - If you enjoy a lighter red, Pinot Noir can be a great option to complement a steak, while sticking to your personal preferences. I would probably head to Patagonia, which is the southernmost wine-producing region in the Americas, and its arid valleys make some of the best Pinot Noir in the world. Its extreme winters and cool summer nights make for a prolonged growing season that’s particularly well suited for Pinot. Bright and high toned enough for dense protein, it’s also notable for its earthy undercurrents, which a nice mushroom accompaniment would lap right up.
Give me some advice on white wine for steak. - I recognize that the concept of white wine and beef may seem suspect to some, but experiencing the smoky, buttery, indulgently rich flavors of a Meursault with a filet mignon or Porterhouse will quickly dispel any notions of incompatibility. And what makes this pairing race full throttle is the teeming acidity that has a similar effect on the fat in steak as the tannins in red wine. It turns the volume up in your palate and then washes you clean for the next bite.
What do you think of sweet wines to pair with a steak? - Sweet wines have a surprising amount of body that can give an unexpected harmony with steak. An Auslese Riesling from Germany offers decadent stone fruit character and enhanced silky texture from residual sugar, but it's all in balance. It's especially good when the steak comes with tart or spicy accompaniments. Alternatively, I recommend a demi-sec Champagne. Their bright acidity brings balance and lift, making the style surprisingly versatile. And due to the autolytic character—think toasty, yeasty and brioche notes—and sea-salt minerality, I'd baste my favorite cut with butter to tie all the sweet and savory goodness together.
white or red with pork? - When it comes to the color of wine, pork can pair just as well with various styles of white wine, rosé and sparkling as well as light- or full-bodied reds. The salty nature makes it great for bubbles. It’s good with oaky whites, especially if it’s smoked pork. So, something like a white Burgundy—like a Mersault with age to it—that has developed richness and smoky hazelnut flavors would be really good with smoked pork. Off-dry whites, too. Riesling with a kiss of residual sugar, like a Kabinett or Spätlese from the Mosel, would be good with pork dishes too. And don’t forget the lean and crisp, slightly herbaceous whites. Those wines can go really well because the acid can be great for cutting through the fatness and the richness of some pork dishes.
What should I not pair with pork? - Although there are no specific rules for matching pork with wine, there are a few points worth keeping in mind to create the optimal wine and pork pairing. Among them, steering clear of highly acidic wines if the pork dish is spicy. It’ll be too much for your mouth. The acid will just cut through everything, and you won’t feel anything other than bitterness. I would caution against high alcohol and heavily oaked wines for spicy pork dishes as well. That will only heighten the sensation of spice, which can make that feeling more uncomfortable. The burn of the alcohol combined with the burn of spice, especially if you’re sensitive, can be really off-putting. However, a spicy pork dish and a sweeter wine pairing can go a long way because the sweetness and the fruitiness of some wines will help calm down all that heat in your mouth. Fat and acid go together great because acid cuts through the fat the same way that wines tend to be very rich and bold and have a creaminess to them.
What is palate blowout? - The idea of hopping from vineyard to vineyard to sip wines may sound appealing for the average consumer in search of the perfect bottle (and, frankly, buzz), but even for sommeliers, winemakers and industry professionals, there is such a thing as too much vino. Palate blowout, the phenomenon of losing your sense of taste after overconsumption, can cause the mouth to not only tire, but also render ineffective. After all, a numb tongue is a tongue that can’t pick up on the flavor nuances of different vintages and varietals, at which point you’re better off downing shots of cheap vodka.
How can I avoid palate blowout? - 1. Hydration, Hydration, Hydration. 2. Avoid Outside Scents. 3. Go from Light to Heavy. 4. Rely on Bubbles. 5. Consume Neutral Foods. 6. Swig and Spit. 7. Don’t Overdo it.
Which wine would you recommend for a simple seared salmon? - With a beautiful piece of wild salmon that is naturally rich in good fats and has a subtle sweetness, you don’t want a wine that will overpower those flavors. Pinot Noir from the Central Otago region of New Zealand is a great pick. The region’s continental climate and strikingly sunny summers produce complex wines with bright fruit flavors and a minerality that’s akin to red Burgundy that make a great match for simply cooked salmon.
How should I pair a salmon crudo? - When it comes to this brightly-flavored, raw preparation of salmon, a crisp, dry Northern Italian white like Gavi. Made exclusively from the Cortese grape in Italy’s Piedmont region, it’s a little fleshy and fruity, with yellow plum and a slight floral note. Crudo usually has a vinegar-forward or citrusy bite, so a wine with higher acidity will provide ideal balance. Gavi is refreshing—there’s not roaring acid, but just enough to be palate cleansing.
How to best pair blackened salmon? - Blackened salmon features a Cajun-inspired spice blend that bridges the gap between sweetness and heat. When it’s done right, a zingy, crispy crust yields to a juicy interior. An excellent match for it in Zinfandel. The brambly, spicy fruit of the Zin is a great pairing for blackened salmon. More robust examples play well with the bold flavors of the dish.
What is a good wine to pair with salmon cakes? - I would pair salmon croquettes with a bottle of rosé Cava. The category’s juicy fruit plays up the sweetness of the salmon, and the lively bubbles and acidity won’t overpower your palate and almost work like delicate scrubbing bubbles to keep your palate refreshed.
How to best enjoy a cedar plank grilled salmon? - Grilling salmon on a cedar plank adds a subtle smokiness that enhances its flavor and complexity. A suitable wine pairing for this dish would be a Chardonnay with some oak aging and elevated acidity, such as a Napa Valley Chardonnay. There’s beautiful symmetry between the toasty and nutty flavors that oak barrels impart to the wine and the salmon’s smokiness from the cedar plank.
What's a good pairing with salmon teriyaki? - Barrel-aged Torrontés from Mendoza. The richness of the fish, plus the soy sauce in the teriyaki adds umami, savory and salty flavors, and then sweetness from brown sugar and honey. For a beautiful companion, my pick is a barrel fermented Torrontés from Mendoza. You need a wine with some oomph to hold its own against all those flavors, but you still want it to be refreshing and lively. Barrel-aged Torrontés also has hints of honey that works nicely with teriyaki sauce.
Suggest a nice rosé to go with olive oil-poached salmon. - Salmon gently poached in olive oil has a tender, succulent texture and decadent richness. To cut through the dish’s fattiness, I recommend a rosé Txakolina, which boasts strawberry notes and subtle effervescence. You'll want a high-acid rosé to really cleanse your palate after each bite you take.
What's your top choice of wine for pairing with a salmon sushi? - A light-bodied and mineral selection is my top choice for salmon sushi. Made with 100% Melon de Bourgogne, Muscadet’s marked acidity, minerality and citrus-like taste complement the fattiness of salmon. It’s also a great match for the dish’s freshness and buttery texture, plus the subtle sweet and tangy flavors of sushi rice. Muscadet Sèvre et Maine undergoes lees aging and has subtle nutty and bready notes, adding a layer of complexity to the wine. The contrast makes for a delicious, harmonious pairing.
What goes well with a pumpkin pie? - With its smooth and creamy texture and a sweet-savory flavor profile dominated by warm spices, pumpkin pie is a time-honored classic. With this in mind, it only makes sense to pair it with one of the world’s most beloved wine varietals: Chardonnay. Chardonnay tends to see new oak and malolactic fermentation during the winemaking process, which imparts notes of baking spices and a velvet-like texture. The pairing accentuates each item’s savory decadence while expanding the flavor spectrum with notes of orchard and citrus fruits.
What should I drink when eating a Key lime pie? - I recommend pairing your Key lime pie—famous for its tangy flavor and creamy texture—with a sparkling brut rosé. The result? A refreshing citrus and red berry explosion framed by confectionery pastry notes. The term ‘brut’ denotes a dry wine, which is key, as the accompanying acidity will cut through and provide lift to the sweetness and fat of the Key lime pie.
What wine should I have with a lemon meringue pie? - Lemon meringue pie has a light and airy texture courtesy of silky and citrusy custard and ultra-fluffy meringue. Nothing pairs better with it than a richer style of Champagne—especially a Blanc de Noir. The creaminess of the Blanc de Noir—a white wine made with dark-skinned grapes—really balances the tart flavors of the pie while still being able to stand up to the richness.
What drink would you recommend with a blueberry pie? - With its sugary, juicy filling, blueberry pie requires a wine capable of balancing its ample sweetness. Choosing a wine with body and structure along with red fruit and just the right amount of tannins is essential. I would recommend pairing the pie with a Cabernet Sauvignon with dark currant and cherry tones.
How can I best enjoy a pecan pie? - Crunchy and creamy, sweet and nutty, pecan pie features a unique combination of flavors and textures. It is best enjoyed with a tall glass of Oloroso Sherry. This dry wine, produced in Andalucia in southern Spain, has a nutty, spicy aroma and complex flavor profile, which includes notes of caramel and dried fruit. The acidity in the Oloroso will help balance that true pecan pie sugary-sweetness. In addition, the pecans pair nicely with the wood, tobacco and balsamic notes in the wine.
Suggest a white wine to pair with my apple pie. - Apple pie, with its sweet-tart filling amped up with cinnamon and other aromatic spices, is a match for Sauternes. This sweet, full-bodied white wine, named for the French region in which it’s produced, is made with grapes with an ultra-concentrated flavor due to Botrytis (a fungus affectionately known as “noble rot”). The combo is especially effective with apple pies made with tart Granny Smith apples. The sweetness of the wine balances the acidity and then is complemented by the spice and buttery pie crust.
What wine do you think I should have with my peanut butter pie? - Rich, creamy, and silky smooth, peanut butter pie features a decadent combination of peanut butter, cream cheese, sugar and, depending on the recipe, either a whipped topping or heavy cream. When it comes to a just-right wine pairing, I can only think of Madeira. The wine has a rich, caramelized flavor that offers a unique combination of sweetness, saltiness from the sea and a subtle bitterness that creates a great match with peanut butter.
What is an enjoyable pairing of wine with a cherry pie? - Most cherry pie recipes call for the addition of lemon juice, which confers a subtle tartness To cut through it, enjoy cherry pie alongside a glass of Beaujolais. You want to consider weight and mouthfeel—cherry pie is heavier with sweet and tart notes. In contrast, Beaujolais offers lightness along with fruity and floral notes.
Best wine for a chess pie? - A quintessential Southern dessert, ooey-gooey chess pie has a sweet, custardy filling made with sugar, butter and eggs. Pair it with Gewürztraminer, a pink-skinned, slightly spicy white wine grape that’s produced all over the world, including Alsace (France), Pfalz (Germany), Yakima Valley (Washington State) and the Finger Lakes (New York). Its acidity will really help cut through those heavy, sweet, delicious pie layers. I'm especially partial to examples from the Finger Lakes, which offer a balance of stone fruit and spice.
Suggest a pairing for my sausage, peppers & onions pizza. - Langhe Nebbiolo. The gritty tannic texture will taper off alongside this umami-packed pie. Meanwhile, the wine’s floral-potpourri notes will highlight the herbaceousness of the meat while the pop of acid cuts through the richness of the carmelized onions and bite of the charred pepper.
What shall I pair with a white pizza? -  Crémant de Bourgogne. This Burgundian sparkling is made using the same method as Champagne but requires less lees aging. Thus, the fresh fruits and zippy acidity are front and center, perfectly cutting through the richness of this creamy slice and lifting it up on a bevy of bubbles.
What's a good wine that compliments mushroom pizza? - Aged Pinot Noir. Find a Pinot Noir with at least five years of age, and you’ll notice there’s an earthy mushroom-on-fresh-forestfloor quality to it. Meanwhile, Pinot’s innate high acid and red fruit profile will balance that umami and bring a freshness to the palate.
What should I pair with a pepperoni pizza? -  Syrah. Pepperoni has a strong savoriness brought on by a plethora of spices—cayenne, aniseed, garlic. So, you’ll need a wine that can stand up to this intensity, like a bold, spice-filled Northern Rhône Syrah.
What can I pair with a pizza with black olives & onions as the topping? - Provence Rosé. This South of France blush has a linear acidity that perfectly complements the saltiness black olives bring to the palate. Typically made with a high percentage of Grenache Noir, the fruitfulness of the variety will bring out the sweetness of tomatoes and caramelized onions.
What's a good pizza for a plain or margherita pizza? -  Chianti Classico. A classic pizza calls for a classic pairing. Chianti Classico, made from predominantly Sangiovese, offers vibrant sour cherry notes and elevated acidity to both cut through the richness of il formaggio and parallel the fruity salsa di pomodoro.
Recommend me a good pairing for a primavera pizza. - Chenin Blanc. Loading up a pie with an abundance of veggies calls for a fuller-bodied white like Chenin Blanc. The grape’s ripe stonefruit and honey notes aren’t at risk of being overwhelmed by even the most cruciferous veg.
I have a buffalo chicken pizza. What should I pair it with? -  German Kabinett Riesling. Spicy foods often enhance the burning sensation of alcohol. Look for something with a lower abv and a little bit of residual sugar—like a Kabinett Riesling—to help fan the flames.
What do you suggest I drink with my square pizza? - Barbera. A rustic square slice calls for the rougher edges of Barbera. With its high acidity, the wine cuts through the sauce and tomato and its tobacco notes and herbaceousness bring out the best from the oregano and garlic.
Which wine should I try with a margherita? -  Gavi di Gavi. A light, fruity, fresh and floral Gavi di Gavi (from the Cortese grape) will not overpower the simple perfection of a margherita slice, and the wine’s slight grassiness on the finish matches up well with the fresh basil and Buffalo mozzarella.
How to best pair my sicilian pizza? - Nerello Mascalese. Sicily’s contribution to the pizza canon boasts a focaccia-like base and goes heavy on the sauce and cheese. Bring out a Nerello Mascalese or an Etna Rosso blend (which almost always heavily features the grape). These Etna reds are enjoying a volcanic surge in popularity and can stand up to anything a Sicilian slice throws at them.
My pizza has clams on it. - The round, rich texture of oaked Chardonnay brings out the creaminess of clams.
My pizza has anchovies on it. - Salty fish calls for a crisp, high-acid white like Greek Assyrtiko.
My pizza has broccoli rabe and cherry peppers on it. - Open a deep, cherry-red Negroamaro from Puglia to tame the bitter green—a wine layered enough to not get lost.
My pizza has artichokes on it. - The slight fizz, lower alcohol and kiss of RS in Vinho Verde are a perfect match for this briny topping.
My pizza has meatballs on it. - From cooler climes, Cabernet Franc often has a green capsicum note that works so well with this meat-packed slice.
My pizza has shrimp on it. - Typically fuller-bodied, riper and rounder, Tempranillo rosé will bring out shrimp’s natural sweetness.
My pizza has bacon and ranch on it. - Creamy dressings call for fuller bodied whites with balanced acid structure like Alsatian Pinot Gris.
My pizza has ham on it. - Go for a New World Sauvignon Blanc with tropical notes—look to New Zealand, California and Chile.
My pizza has jalapeños on it. - The salinity and tanginess of a Manzanilla Sherry will stand up to this spicy pickled pepper.
My pizza has broccoli on it. - Dry, zesty, floral and herby, Grüner Veltliner fits the bill—for a more concentrated style, find a Smaragd from Austria’s Wachau DAC.
My pizza has BBQ sauce on it. - The overripe, jammy nature of the fruits (and sometimes a little RS) in California Zinfandel brings out the sweetness in the sauce.
My pizza has green peppers on it. - The pyrazines present in Carménère mirror those you’ll find biting into a crisp bell pepper.
There’s something deeply soul-satisfying about digging into a bowl of creamy mac and cheese or peppery cacio e pepe. The only way to make this combo better? - The perfect glass of wine, which has the power to elevate the dish’s flavors, counter its richness (or lightness) and deepens the diner’s overall satisfaction manyfold.
The best wine for cacio e pepe? - Italian for “cheese and pepper,” cacio e pepe is a Roman classic of long noodles (usually spaghetti) with Pecorino Romano and a generous amount of black pepper. When it comes to saltiness, Pecorino Romano is not shy. It packs a double punch of richness and salinity because it’s made from sheep’s milk, which is higher in fat than its cow and goat cousins. Plus, the more aged a cheese is, the fuller and sharper its flavor profile is, the more unctuous it tastes in your mouth. You'll want something that is going to balance that out, and cut the full fattiness. Effervescent wine is ideal, like Franciacorta. The sparkling wine from Lombardy has a dry crispness that can stand up to cacio e pepe’s creamy zing. Pét Nat is another excellent option.
How shall I pair a fettuccine alfredo? - A creamy, buttery wine with high acidity, like an oaked Chardonnay. The wine’s acidity is essential for standing up to all the fat in the butter, heavy cream and Parmesan that goes into making Alfredo sauce. The Chardonnay’s boldness and structure play well with the dish’s richness. But if you prefer a red, I suggest something light and fresh, like a Sangiovese from Lungarotti or Umbria.
What goes well with mac & cheese? - Mac and cheese is like a blank slate for culinary creativity. It can be silky smooth or crunchy with breadcrumbs. It may be made with any and all kinds of cheeses, from nutty Gruyere and piquant Roquefort to sharp cheddar. Regardless of the vast possibilities, the high acidity in a dry Riesling would make it a go-to for mac and cheese. Salty cheeses across the board balance the aromatic wine, and Riesling’s brightness refreshes the palate so that you’re ready for another spoonful of mac.
How should I compliment pasta alla norma? - This Sicilian classic dish includes pasta with eggplant tossed in tomato sauce and topped with fresh basil and ricotta salata (pressed and aged ricotta), which lends a salty, pleasantly mouth-puckering bite. I think a Chianti is a winner here. It’s not too fruity, not too dry and an all-around people pleaser that compliments the pasta’s tomatoey-ness. Chianti’s subtle notes of smoke bring out ricotta salata’s deep brininess and the earthy depth of the eggplant, as well as the basil’s fragrant freshness.
Name a wine good with ricotta gnocchi. - Vietti 2020 Tre Vigne Barbera (Barbera d’Asti). Light, fluffy ricotta gnocchi have a delicateness that sets them apart from many of the other cheese-heavy pasta dishes. Ricotta has a distinct sweetness that is great with a lighter red that is not super tannic, like a Barbera from Piedmont. Barbera is the everyday red of Piedmont, which is nestled in the foothills of the Italian Alps. Its friendly red berry notes and mouth-watering acidity make it a welcome match to these joy-inducing, melt-in-your-mouth dumplings
Give me a wine that pairs with stuffed shells. - Altesino 2017 Montosoli Sangiovese (Brunello di Montalcino). Filled with creamy ricotta cheese, topped with milky mozzarella and baked in marinara sauce, Italian-American stuffed shells are comfort food at its best. Something more powerful is perfect for this dish. I would opt for a Brunello di Montalcino, because of its high acid, high tannins and tomato leaf quality. The Tuscan superstar’s profound complexity and robust body—and all its acidity and tannins—can stand up to the festival of pasta, tomato and rich, melty cheese this dish offers.
What's a suitable wine with lasanga? - With meat lasagna, opt for a fuller-bodied red wine. Its puckery, high tannins are softened by the meat’s fat and salt. I’d say an Aglianico from southern Italy. It’s vegetal and earthy, a big wine for all those melty cheeses. The powerful Aglianico grape has been used to make wine since ancient Roman times and usually contains a surprising balance and freshness—an ideal foil for a heavy dish.
How to pair gorgonzola? - When it comes to pasta with peppery, luxurious blue cheese, I tend to gravitate towards a full, fruity, bold wine like Primitivo from Puglia. Primitivo is high in both alcohol and tannins, intensely flavored and beautifully inky. From the boot of Italy, it has ripe red berry flavors and the right amount of structure to match the rich dish.
Traditional wine pairings don’t apply when it comes to Indian food. - I feel this is a general stereotype that’s attached to food that comes from regions that aren’t associated with wine production. Some people are hesitant to pair wines with Indian food out of respect for the cuisine’s flavors, figuring that beverage has to take a secondary role to the complexity of the spices.
What are your thoughts on pairing with a vindaloo? - Spicy dishes like lamb vindaloo, which features coconut, vinegar and abundant hot chili peppers, shouldn’t be paired with a wine that has a high alcohol content. The alcohol will amplify your perception of the spice. This combo will mute the taste of the other key ingredients. Instead, I advise a Grüner Veltliner. The acidity of this wine will tone down the heat without overpowering the spices and flavors.
The modest oyster spends its life in one spot, immobile, filtering seawater for an average of three years until it grows to market size. - While a fresh-shucked oyster comes bathed in that briny dressing, it also has flavors and textures that aficionados scrutinize with the rigor of a wine tasting. Its multifarious character invites a surprising range of pairing options (the popular Irish pairing of raw oysters with Guinness stout is a must-try). Try them with different wines to bring out all their complexities.
Wine for briny oysters? - Oysters taste unabashedly of the sea. If you think of raw oysters as a salty snack akin to olives, nuts or ham, then take a cue from Spain and pair with fino Sherry. Its combination of full-body, bracing acidity and savory nuttiness stands up to oysters’ most brazen side.
Wine for melony oysters? - Many oysters have notes of cucumber or underripe honeydew. This fruitiness is enhanced by sweet wine. The sweetness of Auslese Riesling from Germany is offset by acidity and stony minerality that lift, rather than smother, the delicate oyster.
Wine for metallic oysters? - While the Kimmeridgian soils of Chablis are rich with oyster shells, it’s the Chardonnay’s trademark steely, flinty character that melds with oysters’ coppery metallic notes, making for an exceptionally complementary pairing.
Wine for custardy oysters? - Large, plump oysters have a custardy quality with a subtle hint of sweet cream. Muscadet is a classic pairing due to its acidity and salinity notes. But those produced sur lie—with extended lees contact—lend creamy, yeasty notes that also showcase oysters’ richer side.
Wine and chocolate are arguably two of the most classic Valentine’s Day delicacies. But pairing the two isn’t always as easy as it seems. - Both are very terroir-driven products in that they reflect the flavors of the land in which they’re grown and the environment in which they’re processed. The polyphenols in chocolate are similar to the ones in wine, and they form a natural pairing in that way as well. Like wine, chocolate is also sourced from across the globe. Each region has a unique terroir that results in distinct and nuanced flavors. The trick is to find two flavor profiles that complement one another. The outcome to avoid? Bitterness. The largest thing to understand is that flavonoids are the most prominent polyphenol in chocolate, which gives off a bitter taste similar to tannins in a wine, so you don’t want to overload those phenols. The drier the wine, the more bitter the chocolate, and you do not want to do that to your palate.
How to pair dark chocolate? - Pair a darker chocolate with bigger reds or Ports. The higher tannin complements the bitterness of the cacao. I suggest that you stick to dark chocolate between 67% and 72%, as it won’t be overly bitter or too sweet for red wines. The percentage can indicate the intensity (a high percentage) or sweetness (a lower percentage) of a chocolate. While big, red wines are the standard for dark chocolate, try an 85% dark chocolate bar with an Oregon Chardonnay from State of Mind Wines. The super-dry, bitter dark chocolate confoundingly complemented the salty, bright acidity and texture of the Chardonnay.
How to pair milk chocolate? - Milk chocolate is the most flexible variety when it comes to wine pairings, and it can match with an array of styles. I would pair an Orange Grand Marnier Raspberry Milk Chocolate with a Brut Rosé. Another favorite milk chocolate pairing is Riesling. Its honey aroma and stone-fruit flavors amplify the creaminess of the chocolate, and they’re both on the sweeter side, so neither is competing for your palate. Moreover; lighter-style reds, like Pinot Noir or Beaujolais, offer a safe bet. Most lighter red wines tend to be higher in acid, which also acts as a contrast to the richness of the chocolate. I recommend the Champagne truffle from Teuscher Chocolate for lighter red wine pairings. The structure of the chocolate is creamier and more rounded so as not to overpower the lighter-style red wine.
How to pair white chocolate? - White chocolate is best matched with white wines like Chardonnay, Sauvignon Blanc, or a sweeter bottling like a Moscato. I can’t think of a better sweet match for Sauvignon Blanc than something like a white chocolate. They have a hint of Madagascan vanilla that enhances the fresh lemongrass and citrus notes in Sauvignon Blanc. A white chocolate with citrus undertones from Belgium’s Callebaut Chocolate would pair beautifully with a crisp sparkling wine or even a dessert wine such as Moscato di Asti.
How to pair chocolate? - Chocolates are tricky to pair. Flavors of chocolates with fillings can run the gamut. The pairings that work best are those that have complementary flavor profiles that cancel each other out. For example, chocolates with fruit filling quiet the fruit flavors in the wine, allowing lovely notes of caramel oak to surface. Similarly, caramel-filled chocolates mirror the wine’s oak notes, bringing lovely fruit flavors to prominence. I would suggest trying Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups with a Tuscan red like La Caccia di San Giovanni. The rustic earthiness of the Italian estate with the bright fruit from the Sangiovese are really wonderful complements to the sweet nuttiness of Reese’s.
What are some good wines that go with watermelons? - A good, ripe watermelon has a rich, lingering, honeyed sweetness. You want a wine with a similar character but that’s also light in body, to match the melon’s ethereal texture. Look for a crisp wine with some residual sugar; off-dry Vouvray is a good option. In addition to that long honey characteristic, watermelon has a bright, fruity sugar rush that hits you right up front. A pale Provençal rosé will have a complementary candy-watermelon flavor, but it’s balanced by enough acidity to keep the combination from being cloying. The deeper the color of the watermelon, the more lycopene it has. This is a chemical that naturally occurs in some fruits and vegetables, such as tomatoes. It can break down into flavor compounds reminiscent of lemon or lime. Pairing it with a citrusy sparkling wine, like a Cava or Corpinnat from Penedès, will make a cool, refreshing treat. If you’ve ever enjoyed watermelon in a salad with feta and mint or basil, you know that the fruit has an herbaceous quality that loves salty, savory flavors. Mimic the bracing tang and salt of the cheese with a white wine that has some salinity, like Greek Assyrtiko or Sauvignon Blanc from New Zealand’s Awatere Valley, which also has well-matched herb notes.
Suggest some wines to drink with cucumbers. - Though most of a cucumber’s astringency is in the peel, it also contains a compound called cucurbitacin that lends a slight bitterness throughout. To avoid accentuating that characteristic in your wine, pick a dry, fruity white like Pinot Gris from Alsace or Oregon. Its honeyed pear and cantaloupe flavors will bash any bitter notes into submission. Cucumbers are in the melon family, and they can have flavors akin to unripe honeydew or watermelon. The inherent melon flavors of Verdejo run from green to ripe and luscious, and the wine has crisp citrus notes that sidle up comfortably to a cucumber’s juicy crunch. A cucumber’s fresh, grassy character is why it’s often seen as a must in salads and green juices. Food-friendly Grüner Veltliner shares those green notes, which show up as everything from celery to gooseberry and tarragon. Its mouthwatering acidity will also help tease out the cucumber’s sweetness. Like lettuce, cucumber has a high moisture content that lends a delicate, sometimes crunchy texture and a refreshing taste. Preserve this simple, elegant character with a wine that won’t overwhelm, like Muscadet. Light and savory flavors of citrus zest and seashell will play nice with cucumber’s gentler side.
Which wines should I pair avocados? - Avocados are sometimes used more for texture than flavor. Their silky flesh can even be substituted for butter in baked recipes. A very crisp wine will cut through all the richness and cleanse the palate. White Vinho Verde has spritzy lemon and lime flavors that make it a no-brainer with avocado toast. An avocado’s flesh is very high in beta-caryophyllene, an aromatic compound found in cannabis, as well as cloves, black pepper and rosemary. Though avocado doesn’t taste of these things, they make a nice complement. Zinfandel, known to feature these flavors, has moderate tannins that will play well with the fruit and help cut through its fat. Just as butter has a lactic tang, avocados have a citrus undertone, almost like a lemon or lime without the mouth-puckering sourness. With notes of berries, citrus and cream, Grenache rosé offers both a complement and contrast. It’s terrific with guacamole. Hass avocados, the most common type in the U.S., have a faint yet unmistakable nutty flavor. Tease it out with Fiano di Avellino from Campania, which has similar notes believed to come from hazelnut trees that surround the vineyards. It also has enough body to stand up to an avocado’s richness.
What are my options when pairing with prosciutto? - Salt loves sweet—just think of prosciutto’s affinity with figs or melon. A lightly oaked, off-dry Chenin Blanc from the Loire (e.g. Vouvray) or South Africa has hints of ripe pears, honey and smoke, all of which are naturals with ham. Prosciutto is marbled with fat, which melts on the tongue. Lambrusco—much of which hails from Italy’s Emilia-Romagna region, just like Prosciutto di Parma—offers both cleansing bubbles as well as gentle tannins. Tannins can lessen the richness, while fat mellows tannins’ astringency. A sweet, creamy nuttiness permeates most prosciuttos, especially Prosciutto di Parma, whose pigs are fed the whey from Parmigiano-­Reggiano production. Friulano from Collio in the northeast Italian region of Friuli-­Venezia Giulia­, which is the home of Prosciutto di San Daniele, is full-­bodied and offers prominent nutty notes. An appealingly gamy aroma is a sign of great prosciutto. Malbecs from Cahors in Southwest France feature similar aromas of vintage leather and undergrowth, along with ripe black fruit and spice. Try it with an antipasto plate of prosciutto, soft blue cheese and long-aged Gouda.
Should I check out the wine list online before I go to a restaurant? - Many good restaurants post wine lists (or “sample” lists that change frequently) on their web sites. Study early and impress your friends with your quick decision-making, so you can spend more time drinking and less time reading. Note: Wines are often listed in ascending order from lightest to heaviest. Glasses often have the highest markup. An index quickly tells the range of wines and the restaurant’s strengths, and you might get inspired from there, instead of getting lost in one category. Larger lists may have a much shorter sommelier’s list, designed to highlight the expert’s favorites, and be a mini cheat sheet built into the menu. These lists can be full of value wines, interesting wines, personal favorites and older wines in a peak drinking window.
Glass vs. bottle at a restaurant? - A great glass list is a godsend if you seek variety, or when your party can’t agree on one wine. However, glasses often have the highest markups, can be chosen haphazardly and some restaurants may not store these wines well. Approach “quartinos” with skepticism. A third of a 750ml bottle, it’s either a nice compromise between a glass and bottle, or a sneaky upsell. Keep in mind when with larger groups, there are only four glasses to a bottle.
How do I pair at a restaurant? - Don’t fret about pairing. Dining out, you’re likely to enjoy multiple courses, each with multiple ingredients, for each member of your dinner party. Steak can be stellar with a Cabernet Sauvignon, but is it served with a rich garlic butter, vinegary gastrique or pungent Béarnaise? Don’t stress about it. Some wines work across a wide range of dishes. These “go with everything” wines tend to have higher acidity and moderate alcohol levels. For whites, these wines include Riesling, Albariño, Vinho Verde, Grüner Veltliner, and unoaked Chardonnay like village-level Chablis. For reds, Pinot Noir is a good fallback. Italian reds, especially Barbera d’Alba or d’Asti, Valpolicella Rosso, and Chianti are a safe choice. If your party is divided between red and white, there’s always rosé. And though Champagne always goes with everything, if you’re on a budget, try Cava or crémant.
Do's and do not's with wine at a restaurant? - Presenting the bottle isn’t just a formality. Servers may bring a different vintage, or the wine may have been listed incorrectly. You’re sampling the wine to see if it’s corked (it will smell like wet newspaper/cardboard) or otherwise faulty, not if you like it (glass pours being an exception). Such faults are more likely evident by smell than taste.  Faulty wines are rare, but it’s more common for diners to miss these characteristics. In restaurants, reds are often served too warm, and whites too cold. Don’t hesitate to ask them to further chill a wine, or to let it sit at room temperature for a while before pouring. If they’re topping your wine off too quickly, ask them to slow down. Grapes, regions and wine styles go in and out of fashion. It doesn’t mean they suit your palate or that one type is “better” than another. Having a clear idea of what you like puts you ahead of the vast majority of diners.
Do lesser-known wines mean greater value? - Unfamiliar grapes or regions can bring high quality and a sense of discovery at a fair price. Most restaurants offer wines based on customer expectation, so these other gems are on the list because someone fell in love with them. Try something from Portugal, South Africa, Greece or Virginia. Also look for grapes like Sylvaner, Blaufränkisch, Mencía, Grignolino, Hárslevelü or other lesser-known names. And yet, don’t count out established regions in your quest for value. Regions with famed and pricey wines often also have terrific, less-heralded offerings. Examples include white Bordeaux, or Pinot Noir from Germany or Australia’s Adelaide Hills. There are always “value regions” within the well-known wine countries: Alsace and Languedoc-Roussillon in France; Puglia, Campania and Sardinia in Italy. Look for your favorite varieties in less-obvious places. You’ll usually spend less on great examples of Bordeaux varieties (like Cabernet and Merlot) from Washington State than from Napa. Washington wines have a freshness and balance to them, and the reds age very well. Remember that value and price are very different things. A great Cornas can be a terrific value, while there are cheaper wines best avoided. The wine with the least markup might be a lousy value, while an older wine that’s no longer in stores and carefully cellared for years may be the best value in town.
Vintage wines at restaurants? - Some “challenging” vintages in major regions may produce wines that are less powerful, but can be terrific and food-friendly. The wines from these cooler or challenging vintages usually have higher natural acidity and lower pH levels that allow them to often age more gracefully and longer than the riper, higher-scoring vintages.
Wine markup at restaurants? - Skip the second-cheapest bottle. Everyone does that, so that’s often where you’ll find a bottle the restaurant is trying to get rid of. However, many wine directors take pride in the quality of their “cheapest” bottle, and markup can shrink as you move to higher price points. Be aware of markup. Usually around three times wholesale price, varies by restaurant. It encompasses state laws and taxes, operating costs and other factors.
Suggest me some cheese that pairs well with sparkling wine. - Hailing from New York State’s Adirondacks, Kunik is a rich and buttery spread of a cheese that plays well with bubbly charmers like Domaine Rolet Père et Fils’ Brut Crémant de Jura, with lively bubbles that are the perfect foil to the cheese’s creaminess.
What's a good cheese with white wine? - Chiriboga Blue, a German Blue Cheese from Allgau, has the right amount of funk to stand up to the high acid and sweet, creamy nectarine flavors of Thanisch’s 2014 Riesling from the Mosel, Germany.
What cheese should I try with light red wine? - Anne et Jean-Francois Ganevat’s De Toute Beaute Nature, a Gamay-driven blend, pairs exceptionally well with Ossau Iraty Vielle, a hard sheep cheese from the French Pyrenees. Spicy yet ripe, with fresh red–fruit flavors, the wine balances the cheese’s grassy and herbaceous quality.
Which cheese goes well with medium-bodied red wine? - Nusserhof’s Elda from Alto Adige is an old vine Schiava which pairs exceptionally with Nufenen, a hard cow Alpine cheese from Graubunden, Switzerland. The wine’s silky tannins, coupled with rose petal and exotic spice aromas, meld with the Nufenen’s buttery, nutty and fruity flavor. The cheese also offers a hint of spice, in the way of a sharp herbal, complex quality. Meanwhile, the piney, woodsy flavors of the oozy, bark-wrapped wheel of Jasper Hill’s Harbison blend harmoniously with the earthy and jammy qualities of the Savage Grace 2014 Copeland Vineyard Cabernet Franc from Rattlesnake Hills, Washington. Grab a crusty baguette and dig in.
How do I evaluate the style of a wine? - When approaching food and wine pairings, everything begins with style. “Style” refers to the elements that contribute to the wine’s overall feel in your mouth—viscosity, acidity, tannins and alcohol level—along with flavor type and intensity. Even if you’re new to wine, these terms will likely be familiar to you except, perhaps, tannins.
Tannins, crucial to the aging process of fine wines, are chemical compounds found in the skins, seeds and stems of grapes. Some tannins are also incorporated through aging in wood barrels. You experience tannins, particularly in young, full-bodied red wines, as a sandpaper-like, drying, astringent feel on your tongue. As well-made wine ages, the tannins “melt,” contributing to a more pleasurable, velvety feel in the mouth. Mouthfeel is much easier to discern and communicate than flavor. Flavor is subjective. What tastes like citrus to one person might have a plummy aspect to you. What you discern as smoke, another might taste as mushroom. But style—mouthfeel plus flavor—is something that’s more immediate and communicable. Wine style will enable you to communicate with your retailer or restaurant sommelier in a common language. Pairing is all about matching the main components of a dish and the main components of the wine. That does not always mean complementing. Sometimes, a contrasting style is ideal. But, in general, think about the main dish’s dominant flavor, its character, intensity and the comparative level of its fats to acids. Then find a wine whose style will best showcase that dish.
Examine the following phrase: "White wine with fish, red wine with meat". - The much-maligned “white wine with fish, red wine with meat” rule. It’s very, very old school, and there are many delicious exceptions to it. However, it’s a useful starting point, because it captures the no-fuss, instinctive nature of wine and food pairing. Thus, white wine with fish. If you’ve sipped a light Chardonnay or Pinot Grigio, you recall a light texture on the palate and brighter flavors of citrus. Fish, your sense memories tell you, is also light (in color, but also in texture). White meats like chicken and turkey also belong in this category. If you do the same mental exercise with a full-bodied red wine like Cabernet Sauvignon and a grilled steak, you begin to see the method behind the madness. Both red wine and red meat-laden plates are fuller, darker and deeper in texture and flavor. Thus, they make a good pairing. Of course, it’s not always that simple A Chardonnay from Chablis and a Chardonnay from Napa Valley share some core (and quite subtle) flavors and characteristics, but most of the stylistic elements will vary widely. This holds true for Pinot Grigio, Sauvignon Blanc, Pinot Noir, Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Syrah and other wine grapes that are vinified worldwide. The respective climates, soils and winery treatments will affect the finished style of the wines. And that affects their ability to pair with a specific dish. For say, grilled fish served with a light drizzle of olive oil, a light white wine, like a cool-climate Pinot Grigio or a lean and steely Chablis, would be a good match. But again, not all Pinot Grigios or Chardonnays are created equal. A full-bodied, intensely flavored, oaky wine might render the fish tasteless. What if the fish is not grilled simply and lightly oiled? What if it’s smothered in a rich, flavorful cream sauce? In that case, the very light Pinot Grigio will be overwhelmed by the food. A fuller white wine or a leaner red, like Pinot Noir, might be a better choice. What if a squeeze of lemon is needed to bring this fish to life, or perhaps the fish is a component in an acidic ceviche? Then the acidity of the wine becomes a factor. Either choose a low-acid wine to contrast the acidity of the dish, or pick a crisply acidic wine to complement it. You can see how this can get insane very quickly. So generalizations like “white wine with fish” are useful, but only to a point.
What if I’m looking for a wine to pair with a pasta dish, or a stew, or a dish with many assertive flavors? - You need to consider the overall impression of the dish on the palate. Lamb, chicken, beef, fish or vegetables will likely take on the character of the seasoning, or at least take a back seat to the overall texture. What is the dominant element? If it’s a stew, is it tomato-based and acidic? Try a fresh, aromatic white like Sauvignon Blanc, or a light, easygoing red like Lambrusco. Is it more earthbound, featuring mushrooms, garlic and onions, as in many sautéed dishes? Try a medium-bodied, fruit-forward red like Pinot Noir. If it’s pasta, is it a creamy sauce, or a leaner, oil-based sauce? Some refined dishes and cuisines, like Thai, call for citrus flavorings. Much vegetarian cuisine is herbal in nature. Each will point you to a certain style of wine. One useful shortcut: Many dishes are regional in origin, and you should definitely consider that region’s wines. A Tuscan pasta? Choose a Tuscan wine.
What if the dish is extremely spicy and hot? What wine should I choose? - The richness of the dish will determine this somewhat. In general, you want a low-alcohol, high-acid white wine with some sweetness. The acidity blends with the heat, while the sweetness will help mitigate the heat. A high-alcohol wine will accent the dish’s heat, muting the wine’s flavor. Off-dry Riesling and Gewürztraminer are the classic choices for spicy Asian cuisines like Sichuan, Hunan, Thai and Indian. For reds, be careful with very tannic wines, which can taste especially astringent against spicy food; a high-acid, low-alcohol, low-tannin grape like Gamay usually works well.
Give me names of wines to pair with soft cheeses. - White Wine Pairings: Crisp, dry and young bottlings (Albariño, Soave, Pinot Blanc, Muscadet, Vermentino, Verdejo, Arneis, Sauvignon Blanc, young Chardonnay). Off-dry wines (Gewürztraminer or Riesling) for salty cheeses like feta. Red Wine Pairings: Very young, fruity, unoaked red wines (Loire Cabernet Franc, Pinot Noir, Gamay, Valpolicella, Zweigelt). Crisp, dry rosé. Classic Pairings: Mozzarella di Bufala and Greco di Tufo. Chèvre and Sauvignon Blanc de Touraine.
Give me names of wines to pair with bloomy cheeses. - White Wine Pairings: Dry, traditional-method sparkling wines (brut Champagne. NV for young cheese, vintage for riper, more pungent cheeses). Light-bodied, dry, unoaked Chardonnay (Chablis). Restrained, dry, light-bodied Sauvignon Blanc (Sancerre). Dry, young Riesling, dry Chenin Blanc (Vouvray), Grüner Veltliner. Aged Hunter Valley Semillon or textured white Rhône varieties (Marsanne and Roussanne, specifically Châteauneuf-du-Pape Blanc) for ripe, pungent cheese. Red Wine Pairings: Dry and light-bodied wines that are young, fruity and unoaked (Pinot Noir, Dolcetto, Barbera, Gamay, Cabernet Franc from the Loire, Bonarda, Mencía, Zweigelt). Classic Pairings: Crottin de Chavignol and Sancerre. Chaource and Champagne.
Give me names of wines to pair with washed rind cheeses. - White Wine Pairings: Dry, traditional-method sparkling wines (brut Franciacorta, brut California bottlings). Dry and off-dry, unoaked white wines (Gewurztaminer and Pinot Gris from Alsace, Chenin Blanc from the Loire). Dry, structured whites (Marsanne and Roussanne, mature Hunter Valley Semillon, Riesling from Clare or Eden Valley, Australia) for ripe, pungent cheese. Red Wine Pairings: Beaujolais Villages, Pinot Noir, Poulsard or Trousseau from Jura. Classic Pairings: Munster and off-dry Gewürztraminer. Reblochon and Chignin Blanc. Epoisses and Chambertin (said to be a favorite of Napoleon).
Give me names of wines to pair with semi-soft cheeses. - White Wine Pairings: Dry, white wines with a touch of oak (Chardonnay, Pinot Gris, Rioja). Condrieu. Red Wine Pairings: Gutsy, rustic, crunchy wines without much oak (Côtes de Rhône, Corbières, St-Chinian, Chianti, Mencía, young Bordeaux blends). Classic Pairings: Gruyère and Vin Jaune de Savoie.
Give me names of wines to pair with hard cheeses. - White Wine Pairings: Vintage traditional-method sparkling wines (Champagne, Franciacorta) for younger cheese. Sherry (Amontillado, Palo Cortado). Red Wine Pairings: Bold wines with some age (Nebbiolo, Sangiovese, Aglianico, Rioja or Bordeaux blends from cooler climates like Bordeaux or Margaret River). Classic Pairings: Manchego and Amontillado Sherry, Pecorino Toscano and Chianti Classico.
Give me names of wines to pair with blue cheeses. - White Wine Pairings: Milder blue cheeses like Cambozola share the same potential matches as bloomy cheeses. Noble Rot sweet wines (Sauternes, Barsac, Monbazillac, Riesling Beerenauslese and Trockenbeerenauslese, Quarts de Chaume) for sharp, salty cheese. Dessert wines from dried grapes (Vin Santo, Jurançon, Recioto de Soave). Late-harvest wines (Riesling Spätlese or Gewurztraminer Vendanges Tardives) for cheeses not overtly pungent. Red Wine Pairings: Sweet, fortified reds (Vintage Port, LBV Port, Maury, Banyuls). Classic Pairings: Roquefort and Sauternes. Gorgonzola Piccante and Vin Santo. Stilton and Port.
I'm looking for wines to pair with very rich, fatty dishes. - With fried foods, you want a crisp, light or sparkling wine to cut through the oil. It cleanses your palate, allowing you to taste the fish or chicken. Sometimes, you want to contrast, not complement, the dish and the wine. If the dish is creamy and rich, it might render a rich, creamy wine like a warm-climate Chardonnay flabby. It that case, an acidic wine could cut the richness and allow both flavors to shine. A lamb or beef dish swimming in a rich, nuanced sauce might cause for a big, powerful red wine to showcase those flavors.
I'm looking for wines to pair with grilled meats. - Grilling imparts a smoky flavor, obviously, but also an earthiness to meats. Choose a rich, full-bodied white wine for grilled chicken or fish, or a big, powerful red like Zinfandel for grilled red meat. Often, oak treatment melds well with the smokiness from grilling.
I'm looking for wines to pair with vegetable dishes. - Two important questions: What’s the richness of the dish? (cream sauce, dairy, etc.) Is it cooked or raw? If dairy enriches the dish, then a richer wine is called for—but this is a relative term. Fresh, aromatic whites with a touch of sweetness will generally pair well. When pairing wine with vegetables, stay in the comfort zone of Riesling and Pinot Grigio for whites, or light, easygoing reds like Beaujolais. Are your root vegetables cooked (they’ll be on the earthy side, so try a full-bodied white like many Chardonnays) or raw? Mushrooms are earthy in flavor, so a Pinot Noir might match.
Does you being a wine snob make you a fun neural network? - I am, if you want me to be. If you are hosting friends for dinner, you want them to enjoy your cooking and appreciate the wines without necessarily seeing the effort and thought behind them. What if you unwittingly serve a wine that makes your veal dish taste like a heel cushion, or your sole meunière makes the wine taste like skid-row jug juice? No meal has been completely ruined by an improper pairing, but time, consideration and experimentation will improve your odds of getting it right.